NYPL RESEARCH LIBRARIES 



3 3433 07994702 8 



m 







■^6 

WITH CHRIST 



IN THE 



SCHOOL OF PRAYER ; 



CJougits on our Erammgfor tSei^mistrg 
of $ntercei5!S(on» 



BY 

Rev. ANDREW MURRAY. 



*'LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY.' 



THE RODGERS COMPANY 






THE NLW YOBr 
PUBLIC LIBRARY 



54 A 



ASTOR, LENOX AND 

TILDEN FOUNDATIONS 

R 1921 L 



PREFACE. 



OF all the promises connected with the command, 
"Abide in me," there is none higher, and none 
that sooner brings the confession, *' Not that I have 
already attained, or am already made perfect," than 
this : "If ye abide in me, ask whatsoever ye will, and 
it shall be done unto you. ' ' Power with God is the 
highest attainment of the life of full abiding. 

And of all the traits of a Hfe Like Christ there is 
none higher and more glorious than conformity to 
Him in the work that now engages Him without 
ceasing in the Father's presence — His all-prevailing 
intercession. The more we abide in Him, and grow 
unto His likeness, will His priestly life work in us 
mightily, and our life become what His is, a life that 
ever pleads and prevails for men. 

" Thou hast made us kings and priests unto God." 
Both in the king and the priest the chief thing is 
power, influence, blessing. In the king it is the power 
coming downward ; in the priest, the power rising 
upward, prevailing with God. In our blessed Priest- 
King, Jesus Christ, the kingly power is founded on 
the priestly " He is able lo save to the uttermost, be- 
cause He ever liveth to make intercession." In us, 
3 



Preface. 

His priests and kings, it is no otherwise ; it is in inter- 
cession that the Church is to find and wield its highest 
power, that each member of the Church is to prove 
his descent from Israel, who as a prince had power 
with God and with men, and prevailed. 

It is under a deep impression that the place and 
power of prayer in the Christian life is too little un- 
derstood, that this book has been written. I feel sure 
that as long as we look on prayer chiefly as the means 
of maintaining our own Christian life, we shall not 
know fully what it is meant to be. But when we learn 
to regard it as the highest part of the work entrusted 
to us, the root and strength of all other work, we shall 
see that there is nothing that we so need to study and 
practise as the art of praying aright. If I have at all 
succeeded in pointing out the progressive teaching of 
our Lord in regard to prayer, and the distinct refer- 
ence the wonderful promises of the last night (John 
xiv. i6) have to the works we are to do in His Name, 
to the greater works, and to the bearing much fruit, 
we shall all admit that it is only when the Church 
gives herself up to this holy work of intercession that 
we can expect the power of Christ to manifest itself 
in her behalf. It is my prayer that God may use this 
little book to make clearer to some of His children 
the wonderful place of power and influence which He 
is waiting for them to occupy, and for which a weary 
world is waiting, too. 

In connection with this there is another truth that 
has come to me with wonderful clearness as I studied 
the teaching of Jesus on pra)^er. It is this : that the 
4 



Preface. 

Father waits to hear every prayer of faith, to give us 
whatsoever we will, and whatsoever we ask in Jesus' 
name. We have become so accustomed to limit the 
wonderful love and the large promises of our God, 
that we cannot read the simplest and clearest state- 
ments of our Lord without the qualifying clauses by 
which we guard and expound them. If there is one 
thing I think the Church needs to learn, it is that God 
means prayer to have an answer, and that it hath not 
entered into the heart of man to conceive what God 
will do for His child who gives himself to believe that 
his prayer will be heard. God hears prayer ; this is 
a truth universally admitted, but of which very few 
understand the meaning, or experience the power. If 
what I have written stir my reader to go to the Mas- 
ter's words, and take His wondrous promises simply 
and literally as they stand, my object has been at- 
tained. 

And then just one thing more. Thousands have in 
these last years found an unspeakable blessing in 
learning how completely Christ is our life, and how 
He undertakes to be and to do all in us that we need. 
I know not if we have yet learned to apply this truth 
to our prayer-life. ( Many complain that they have not 
the power to pray in faith, to pray the efifectual prayer 
that availeth much. The message I would fain bring 
them is that the blessed Jesus is waiting, is longing, 
to teach them this. Christ is our Hfe ; in heaven He 
ever liveth to pray ; His life in us is an ever-praying 
life, if we will but trust Him for it. Christ teaches us 
to pray not only by example, by instruction, by com- 
5 



Preface. 

mand, by promises, but by shozving us Himself, the 
ever-living Intercessor, as our Life. It is when we 
believe this, and go and abide in Him forour prayer- 
hfe, too, that our fears of not being able to pray aright 
will vanish, and we shall joyfully and triumphantly 
trust our Lord to teach us to pray, to be Himself the 
life and the power of our prayer. 

May God open our eyes to see what the holy min- 
istry of intercession is to which, as His royal priest- 
hood, we have been set apart. May He give us a 
large and strong heart to believe what mighty influ- 
ence our prayers can exert. And may all fear as to 
our being able to fulfil our vocation vanish as we see 
Jesus, living ever to pray, living in us to pray, and 
standing surety for our prayer-life. 

Andrew Murray. 



CONTENTS. 



LESSON PAGE 

1. Lord ! teach us to pray ; or. The Only Teacher . . 9 

2. In spirit and truth ; or, The True Worshippers . . 17 

3. Pray to thy Father, which is in secret ; or. Alone 

with God 24 

4. After this manner pray ; or, The Model Prayer . . 32 

5. Ask, and it shall be given you ; or, The Certainty 

of the Answer to Prayer 40 

6. How much more? or, The Infinite Fatherliness of 

God 47 

7. How MUCH more the Holy Spirit; or. The All-Com- 

prehensive Gift 56 

8. Because of his importunity ; or. The Boldness of God's 

Friends 63 

9. Pray the Lord of the Harvest; or, Prayer provides 

Laborers 71 

10. What wilt thou ? or. Prayer must be definite ... 78 

11. Believe that ye have received; or. The Faith that 

takes 85 

12. Have faith in God; or. The Secret of Believing 

Prayer 93 

13. By Prayer and Fasting ; or. The Cure of Unbelief 101 

14. When ye stand praying, forgive ; or, Prayer and Love 110 

7 



Contents. 



LESSON PAGB 

15. If two agree ; or, The Power of United Prayer . . 117 

16. Speedily, though bearing long; or, The Power of 

Persevering Prayer 124 

17. I KNOW that Thou hearest me always ; or. Prayer 

in Harmony with the Being of God 135 

18. Whose is this image? or. Prayer in Harmony with 

THE Destiny of Man 143 

19. I go unto the Father : or. Power for Praying and 

Working 150 

20. That the Father may be glorified; or, The Chief 

End of Prayer 157 

21. If ye abide in mr ; or, The All-Inclusive Condition 165 

22. My words in you; or, The Word and Prayer .... 175 

23. Bear fruit, that the Father may give what ye ask : 

OR, Obedience the Path to Power in Prayer . . 182 

24. In my Name; or. The All-Prevailing Plea 190 

25. At that day ; or. The Holy Spirit and Prayer . . . 200 
2G. I have prayed for thee; or, Christ the Intercessor 209 

27. Father! I will; or, Christ the High Priest. , . . 219 

28. Father! not what I will; or, Christ the Sacrifice 226 

29. According to His will; or, Our Boldness in Prayer 234 

30. An holy priesthood ; or. The Ministry of Intercession 244 

31. Pray without ceasing; or, A Life of Prayer. . . . 252 



George Muller, and the Secret of his Power in 

Prayer 259 

8 



lEitlj Christ in t\t Stfjoal of ^ragtr. 



FIRST I.BSSON. 

** Lord, teach us to pray ;** or, The Only Teacher. 

And it came to pass, as He was praying in a certain place, 
that when He ceased, one of His disciples said to Him, Lord, 
teach us to pray, — LuKE xi. I. 

THE disciples had been with Christ and seen Him 
pray. They had learned to understand some- 
thing of the connection between His wondrous life in 
public, and His secret life of prayer. They had learned 
to believe in Him as a Master in the art of prayer 
— none could pray like Him. And so they came to 
Him with the request, "Lord, teach us how to pray." 
And in after years they would have told us that 
there were few things more wonderful or blessed 
that He taught them than His lessons on prayer. 

And now still it comes to pass, as He is praying 
in a certain place, that disciples who see Him thus 
engaged feel the need of repeating the same request, 
" Lord, teach us to pray." As we grow in the Chris- 
tian life, the thought and the faith of the Beloved 
Master in His never-failing intercession becomes ever 
9 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

more precious, and the hope of being like Christ 
in His intercession gains an attractiveness before 
unknown. And as we see Him pray, and remember 
that there is none who can pray like Him, and none 
who can teach like Him, we feel the petition of the 
disciples, "Lord, teach us to pray," is just what we 
need. And as we think how all He is and has, how 
He Himself is our very own, how He is Himself our 
life, we feel assured that we have but to ask, and He 
will be delighted to take us up into closer fellow- 
ship with Himself, and teach us to pray even as He 
prays. 

Come, my brothers ! Shall we not go to the 
Blessed Master and ask Him to enrol our names 
too anew in that school which He always keeps open 
for those who long to continue their studies in the 
Divine art of prayer and intercession ? Yes, let us 
this very day say to the Master, as they did of old, 
" Lord, teach us to pray." As we meditate, we shall 
find each word of the petition we bring to be full of 
meaning. 

"Lord, teach us to pray.'" Yes, to pray. That is 
what we need to be taught. Though in its begin- 
nings prayer is so simple that the feeblest child can 
pray, yet it is at the same time the highest and holiest 
work to which man can rise. It is fellowship with 
the Unseen and Most Holy One. The powers of the 
eternal world have been placed at its disposal. It is 
the very essence of true religion, the channel of all 
blessings, the secret of power and life. Not only for 
ourselves, but for others, for the Church, for the 
lo 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

world, it is to prayer that God has given the right to 
take hold of Him and His strength. It is on prayer 
that the promises wait for their fulfilment, the king- 
dom for its coming, the glory of God for its full reve- 
lation. And for this blessed work, how slothful and 
unfit we are. It is only the Spirit of God can enable 
us to do it aright. How speedily we are deceived 
into a resting in the form, while the power is wanting. 
Our early training, the teaching of the Church, the in- 
fluence of habit, the stirring of the emotions — how 
easily these lead to prayer which has no spiritual 
power, and avails but little. True prayer, that takes 
hold of God's strength, that availeth much, to which 
the gates of heaven are really opened wide — who 
would not cry, Oh for some one to teach me thus to 
pray? 

Jesus has opened a school, in which He trains His 
redeemed ones, who specially desire it, to have power 
in prayer. Shall we not enter it with the petition. 
Lord ! it is just this we need to be taught ! O teach 
us \.opray. 

" Lord, teach us to pray." Yes, tis, Lord. We have 
read in Thy Word with what power Thy believing 
people of old used to pray, and what mighty wonders 
were done in answer to their prayers. And if this 
took place under the Old Covenant, in the time of 
preparation, how much more wilt Thou not now, in 
these days of fulfilment, give Thy people this sure 
sign of Thy presence in their midst. We have heard 
the promises given to Thine apostles of the power of 
praj^er in Thy name, and have seen how gloriously 
II 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

they experienced their truth ; we know for certain, 
they can become true to us too. We hear continu- 
ally even in these days what glorious tokens of Thy 
power Thou dost still give to those who trust Thee 
fully. Lord ! these all are men of like passions with 
ourselves ; teach us to pray so too. The promises are 
for us, the powers and gifts of the heavenly world are 
for us. O teach ns to pray so that we may receive 
abundantly. To us too Thou hast entrusted Thy 
work, on our prayer too the coming of Thy kingdom 
depends, in our prayer too, Thou canst glorify Thy 
name; " Lord, teach us to pray." Yes, us, Lord; 
we offer ourselves as learners; we would indeed be 
taught of Thee. " Lord, teach us to pray." 

" Lord, teach us to pray." Yes, we feel the need 
now of being taught to pray. At first there is no 
work appears so simple ; later on, none that is more 
difficult ; and the confession is forced from us : We 
know not how to pray as we ought. It is true we 
have God's Word, with its clear and sure promises ; 
but sin has so darkened our mind, that we know not 
always how to apply the Word. In spiritual things 
we do not always seek the most needful things or 
fail in praying according to the law of the sanctuary. 
In temporal things we are still less able to avail our- 
selves of the wonderful liberty our Father has given 
us to ask what we need. And even when we know 
what to ask, how much there is still needed to make 
prayer acceptable. It must be to the glory of God, in 
full surrender to His will, in full assurance of faith, 
in the name of Jesus, and with a perseverance that, 

12 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

if need be, refuses to be denied. All this must be 
learned. It can only be learned in the school of much 
prayer, for practice makes perfect. Amid the painful 
consciousness of ignorance and unworthiness, in the 
struggle between believing and doubting, the heav- 
enly art of effectual prayer is learnt. Because even 
when we do not remember it, there is One, the Be- 
ginner and Finisher of faith and prayer, who watches 
over our praying, and sees to it that i7i all who trust 
Him for it their education in the school of prayer 
shall be carried on to perfection. Let but the deep 
undertone of all our prayer be the teachableness that 
comes from a sense of ignorance, and from faith in 
Him as a perfect teacher, and we may be sure we 
shall be taught, we shall learn to pray in power. Yes, 
we may depend upon it, He teaches to pray. 

" ZcT^, teach us to pray." None can teach like 
Jesus, none but Jesus ; therefore we call on Him, 
" Lord, teach us to pray." A pupil needs a teacher 
who knows his work, who has the gift of teaching, 
who in patience and love will descend to the pupil's 
needs. Blessed be God ! Jesus is all this, and much 
more. He knows what prayer is. It is Jesus, pray- 
ing Himself, who teaches to pray. He knows what 
prayer is. He learned it amid the trials and tears of 
His earthly life. In heaven it is still His beloved 
work; His life there is prayer. Nothing delights 
Him more than to find those whom He can take 
with Him into the Father's presence, whom He can 
clothe with power to pray down God's blessing on 
those around them, whom He can train to be His 
13 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

fellow-workers in the intercession by which the king- 
dom is to be revealed on earth. He knows how to 
teach. Now by the urgency of felt need, then by the 
confidence with which joy inspires. Here by the 
teaching of the Word, there by the testimony of 
another believer who knows what it is to have prayer 
heard. By His Holy Spirit he has access to our 
heart, and teaches us to pray by showing us the sin 
that hinders the prayer, or giving us the assurance 
that we please God. He teaches, by giving not only 
thoughts of what to ask or how to ask, but by 
breathing within us the very spirit of prayer, by 
living within us as the Great Intercessor. We may, 
indeed, and most joyfully, say, "Who teacheth like 
Him?" Jesus never taught His disciples how to 
preach, only how to pray. He did not speak much 
of what was needed to preach well, but much of 
praying well. To know how to speak to God is 
more than knowing how to speak to man. Not 
power with men, but power with God is the first 
thing. Jesus loves to teach us how to pray. 

What think you, my beloved fellow-disciples! 
would it not be just what we need, to ask the Master 
for a month to give us a course of special lessons on 
the art of prayer? As we meditate on the words 
He spake on earth, let us yield ourselves to his teach- 
ing in the fullest confidence that with such a teacher 
we shall make progress. Let us take time, not only 
to meditate, but to pray, to tarry at the foot of the 
throne, and be trained to the work of intercession. 
Let us do so in the assurance that amidst our stam- 
14 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

merings and fears He is carrying on His work most 
beautifully. He will breathe His own life, which is 
all prayer, into us. As He makes us partakers of 
His righteousness and His life, He will of His inter- 
cession, too. As the members of His body, as a 
holy priesthood, we shall take part in His priestly 
work of pleading and prevailing with God for men. 
Yes, let us most joyfully say, ignorant and feeble 
though we be, ''Lord, teach us to pray." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! who ever livest to pray, Thou 
canst teach me too to pray, me too to live ever to 
pray. In this Thou lovest to make me share Thy 
glory in heaven, that I should pray without ceasing, 
and ever stand as a priest in the presence of my 
God. 

Lord Jesus ! I ask Thee this day to enrol my 
name among those who confess that they know not 
how to pray as they ought, and specially ask Thee 
for a course of teaching in prayer. Lord ! teach me 
to tarry with Thee in the school, and give Thee time 
to train me. May a deep sense of my ignorance, 
of the wonderful privilege and power of prayer, of 
the need of the Holy Spirit as the Spirit of prayer, 
lead me to cast away my thoughts of what I think I 
know, and make me kneel before Thee in true teach- 
ableness and poverty of spirit. 

And fill me, Lord, with the confidence that with 
such a teacher as Thou art I shall learn to pray. 
15 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

In the assurance that I have as my teacher, Jesus, 
who is ever praying to the Father, and by His 
prayer rules the destinies of His Church and the 
world, I will not be afraid. As much as I need to 
know of the mysteries of the prayer-world, Thou wilt 
unfold for me. And when I may not know, Thou 
wilt teach me to be strong in faith, giving glory to 
God. 

Blessed Lord ! Thou wilt not put to shame Thy 
scholar who trusts Thee, nor, by Thy grace, would 
he Thee, either. Amen. 



i6 



SECOND LESSON. 

" In spirit and truth : *' or, The True Worshippers. 

The hour Cometh^ and now is, when the true worship- 
pers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for such 
doth the Father seek to be His worshippers. God is a 
Spirit : and they that worship Him must worship Him in 
spirit and truth. — John IV. 23, 24. 

THESE words of Jesus to the woman of Samaria 
are His first recorded teaching on the subject of 
prayer. They give us some wonderful first gUmpses 
into the world of prayer. The Father seeks worship- 
pers ; our worship satisfies His loving heart and is a 
joy to him. He seeks true worshippers, but finds 
many not such as he would have them. True wor- 
ship is that which is in spirit and truth. The So7i has 
come to open the way for this worship in spirit and in 
truth, and teach it us. And so one of our first lessons 
in the school of prayer must be to understand what 
it is to pray in spirit and in truth, and to know how 
we can attain to it. 

To the woman of Samaria our Lord spoke of a 
threefold worship. There is first, the ignorant wor- 
ship of the Samaritans: "Ye worship that which 
ye know not." The second, the intelligent worship 
of the Jew, having the true knowledge of God : 
2 17 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

" We worship that which we know, for salvation is of 
the Jews." And then the new, the spiritual worship 
which He Himself has come to introduce: "The 
hour is coming, and is now, when the true worship- 
pers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth.'' 
From the connection it is evident that the words 
"in spirit and truth" do not mean, as is often 
thought, earnestly, from the heart, in sincerity. The 
Samaritans had the five books of Moses and some 
knowledge of God ; there was doubtless more than 
one among them who honestly and earnestly sought 
God in prayer. The Jews had ^the true full revela- 
tion of God in His word, as thus far given; there 
were among them godly men, who called upon God 
with their whole heart. And yet not " in spirit and 
truth," in the full meaning of the words. Jesus says, 
** The hour is coming^ and now is:'''' it is only in 
and through Him that the worship of God will be in 
spirit and truth. 

Among Christians one still finds the three classes 
of worshippers. Some who in their ignorance hardly 
know what they ask ; they pray earnestly, and yet 
receive but little. Others there are, who have 
more correct knowledge, who try to pray with all 
their mind and heart, and often pray most earnestly, 
and yet do not attain to the full blessedness of wor- 
ship in spirit and truth. It is into this third class we 
must ask our Lord Jesus to take us ; we must be 
taught of Him how to worship in spirit and truth. 
This alone is spiritual worship ; this makes us wor- 
shippers such as the Father seeks. In prayer every- 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

thing will depend on our understanding well and 
practising the worship in spirit and truth. 

*' God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must 
worship Him iit spirit and truth." The first thought 
suggested here by the Master is that there must be 
harmony between God and His worshippers ; such 
asGodis, must His worship be. This is according 
to a principle which prevails throughout the universe : 
we look for correspondence between an object and 
the organ to which it reveals or yields itself. The 
eye has an inner fitness for the light, the ear for 
sound. The man who would truly wership God, 
would find and know and possess and enjoy God, 
must be in harmony with Him, must have the capacity 
for receiving Him. Because God is Spirit., we must 
worship in spirit. As God is, so His worshipper. 

And what does this mean ? The woman had asked 
our Lord whether Samaria or Jerusalem was the true 
place of worship. He answers that henceforth wor- 
ship is no longer to be limited to a certain place : 
*' Woman, believe Me, the hour cometh, when neither 
in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship 
the Father." As God is Spirit, not bound by space 
or time, but in His infinite perfection always and 
everywhere the same, so His worship would hence- 
forth no longer be confined by place or form, but 
spiritual as God Himself is spiritual. A lesson of 
deep importance. How much our Christianity suffers 
from this, that it is confined to certain times and 
places ? A man who seeks to pray earnestly in the 
church or in the closet, spends the greater part of the 
19 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

week or the day in a spirit entirely at variance with 
that in which he prayed. His worship was the work 
of a fixed place or hour, not of his whole being. 
God is a Spirit; He is the Everlasting and Unchange- 
able One ; what He is, He is always and in truth. 
Our worship must even so be in spirit and truth 
His worship must be the spirit of our life ; our life 
must be worship in spirit as God is Spirit. 

" God is a Spirit ; and they that worship Him 
must worship Him in spirit and truth." The second 
thought that comes to us is that this worship in the 
spirit must come from God himself. God is Spirit ; 
He alone has Spirit to give. It was for this He 
sent His Son to fit us for such spiritual worship by 
giving us the Holy Spirit. It is of His own work 
that Jesus speaks when He says twice, "The hour 
Cometh," and then adds, "and is now." He came to 
baptize with the Holy Spirit ; tlie Spirit could not 
stream forth till He was glorified (John i. 33 ; vii. 37, 
38; xvi. 7). It was when He had made an end of 
sin, and entering into the Holiest of all with His 
blood, had there on our behalf received the Holy 
Spirit (Acts ii. 33), that He could send Him down 
to us as the Spirit of the Father. It was when 
Christ had redeemed us, and we in Him had received 
the position of children, that the Father sent forth 
the Spirit of His Son into our hearts to cry, ''Abba, 
Father." The worship in spirit is the worship of 
the Father in the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Son- 
ship. 

This is the reason why Jesus here uses the name 
20 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of Father. We never find one of the Old Testament 
saints personally appropriate the name of child or 
call God his Father. The worship of the Father is 
only possible to those to whom the Spirit of the Son 
has been given. The worship iji spirit is only possi- 
ble to those to whom the Son has revealed the 
Father, and who have received the spirit of Sonship. 
It is only Christ who opens the way and teaches the 
worship in spirit. 

And in truth. That does not only mean in sin- 
cerity. Nor does it only signify, in accordance with 
the truth of God's Word. The expression is one of 
deep and Divine meaning. Jesus is " the only-begot- 
ten of the Father, full of grace and truth.^^ "The 
law was given by Moses ; grace and truth came by 
Jesus Christ." Jesus says, ''lam the truth and the 
life." In the Old Testament all was shadow and 
promise ; Jesus brought and gives the realty, the sub- 
stance, of things hoped for. In Him the blessings 
and powers of the eternal life are our actual posses- 
sion and experience. Jesus is full of grace and truth; 
the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of truth ; through Him 
the grace that is in Jesus is ours in deed and truth, a 
positive communication out of the Divine life. And 
so worship in spirit is worship t7i truth ; actual living 
fellowship with God a real correspondence and har- 
mony between the Father, who is a Spirit, and the 
child praying in the spirit. 

What Jesus said to the woman of Samaria, she 
could not at once understand. Pentecost was needed 
to reveal its full meaning. We are hardly prepared 

21 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

at our first entrance into the school of prayer to 
grasp such teaching. We shall understand it better 
later on. Let us only begin and take the lesson as 
He gives it. We are carnal and cannot bring God 
the worship He seeks. But Jesus came to give the 
Spirit ; He has given Him to us. Let the disposition 
in which we set ourselves to pray be what Christ's 
words have taught us. Let there be the deep con- 
fession of our inability to bring God the worship that 
is pleasing to Him ; the childlike teachableness that 
waits on Him to instruct us ; the simple faith that 
yields itself to the breathing of the Spirit. Above all, 
let us hold fast the blessed truth — we shall find that 
the Lord has more to say to us about it — that the 
knowledge of the Fatherhood of God, the revelation 
of His infinite Fatherliness in our hearts, the faith in 
the infinite love that gives us His Son and His Spirit 
to make us children, is indeed the secret of prayer in 
spirit and truth. This is the new and living way 
Christ opened up for us. To have Christ the Son, 
and the Spirit of the Son, dwelling within us, and re- 
vealing the Father, this makes us true, spiritual wor- 
shippers. 

' ' Lord teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! I adore the love with which Thou 
didst teach a woman, who had refused Thee a cup of 
water, what the worship of God must be. I rejoice 
in the assurance that Thou wilt no less now instruct 
Thy disciple, who comes to Thee with a heart that 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

longs to pray in spirit and in truth. O my Holy 
Master ! do teach me this blessed secret. 

Teach me that the worship in spirit and truth is not 
of man, but only comes from Thee ; that it is not only 
a thing of times and seasons, but the outflowing of a 
life in Thee. Teach me to draw near to God in 
prayer under the deep impression of my ignorance 
and my having nothing in myself to offer Him, and 
at the same time of the provision Thou, my Saviour, 
makest for the Spirit's breathing in my childlike 
stammerings. I do bless Thee that in Thee I am a 
child, and have a child's liberty of access ; that in 
Thee I have the spirit of Sonship and of worship in 
truth. Teach me, above all, Blessed Son of the 
Father, how it is the revelation of the Father that 
gives confidence in prayer ; and let the infinite Father- 
liness of God's heart be my joy and strength for a life 
of prayer and of worship. Amen. 
23 



THIRD LESSON. 

** Pray to thy Father, which is in secret ; ** or, 
Alone with God. 

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine inner 
cha7nbcr, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father 
which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall recompense thee. — Matt vi. 6. 

AFTER Jesus had called His first disciples, He 
gave them their first public teaching in the 
Sermon on the ]\Iount. He there expounded to them 
the kingdom of God, its laws and its life. In that 
kingdom God is not only King, but Father ; He not 
only gives all, but is Himself all. In the knowledge 
and fellowship of Him alone is its blessedness. 
Hence it came as a matter of course that the revela- 
tion of prayer and the prayer-life was a part of His 
teaching concerning the New Kingdom He came to 
set up. Moses gave neither command nor regulation 
with regard to prayer ; even the prophets say little 
directly of the duty of prayer ; it is Christ who 
teaches to pray. 

And the first thing the Lord teaches His disciples 

is that they must have a secret place for prayer ; 

every one must have some solitary spot where he can 

be alone with his God. Every teacher must have a 

24 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

schoolroom. We have learned to know and accept 
Jesus as our only teacher in the school of prayer. He 
has already taught us at Samaria that worship is no 
longer confined to times and places ; that worship, 
spiritual true worship, is a thing of the spirit and the 
life ; the whole man must in his whole life wor- 
ship in spirit and truth. And yet he wants each one 
to choose for himself the fixed spot where He can 
daily meet Him. That inner chamber, that solitary 
place, is Jesus' schoolroom. That spot may be any- 
where ; that spot may change from day to day if we 
have to change our abode ; but that secret place 
there must be, with the quiet time in which the pupil 
places himself in the Master's presence, to be by Him 
prepared to worship the Father. There alone, but 
there most surely, Jesus comes to us to teach us to 
pray. 

A teacher is always anxious that his schoolroom 
should be bright and attractive, filled with the light 
and air of heaven ; a place where pupils long to 
come, and love to stay. In His first words on prayer 
in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus seeks to set the 
inner chamber before us in its most attractive light. 
If we listen carefully, we soon notice what the chief 
thing is He has to tell us of our tarrying there. 
Three times He uses the name of Father ; " Pray to 
thy Father ; " " Thy Father shall recompense thee ; ' ' 
" Your Father knoweth what things ye have need 
of." The first thing in closet-prayer is: I must 
meet my Father. The light that shines in the closet 
must be the light of the Father's countenance. The 
25 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

fresh air from heaven with which Jesus would have 
it filled, the atmosphere in which I am to breathe 
and pray, is : God's Father-love, God's infinite 
Fatherliness. Thus each thought or petition we 
breathe out will be simple, hearty, childlike trust in 
the Father. This is how the Master teaches us to 
pray ; He brings us into the Father's living presence. 
What we pray there must avail. Let us listen care- 
fully to hear what the Lord has to say to us. 

First, '■'Pray to thy Father which is in secrety 
God is a God who hides Himself to the carnal eye. 
As long as in our worship of God we are chiefly 
occupied with our own thoughts and exercises, we 
shall not meet Him who is a Spirit, the unseen One. 
But to the man who withdraws himself from all that 
is of the world and man, and prepares to wait upon 
God alone, the Father will reveal Himself. As he 
forsakes and gives up and shuts out the world, and 
the life of the world and surrenders himself to be led 
of Christ into the secret of God's presence, the light 
of the Father's love will rise upon him. The secrecy 
of the inner chamber and the closed door, the entire 
separation from all around us, is an image of, and so 
a help to that spiritual sanctuary, the secret of God's 
tabernacle, within the veil, where our spirit truly 
comes into contact with the Invisible One. And so we 
are taught, at the very outset of our search after the 
secret of effectual prayer, to remember that it is in 
the inner chamber, where we are alone with the 
Father, that we shall learn to pray aright. The Father 
is in secret ; in these words Jesus teaches us where 
26 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

He is waiting us, where He is always to be found. 
Christians often complain that private prayer is not 
what it should be. They feel weak and sinful, the 
heart is cold and dark ; it is as if they have so little 
to pray, and in that little no faith or joy. They are 
discouraged and kept from prayer by the thought 
that they cannot come to the Father as they ought 
or as they wish. Child of God ! listen to your 
Teacher. He tells you that when you go to private 
prayer your first thought must be : the Father is in 
secret, the Father waits me there. Just because 
your heart is cold and prayerless, get you into the 
presence of the loving Father. As a father pitieth 
his children, so the Lord pitieth you. Do not be 
thinking of how little you have to bring God, but 
of how much He wants to give you. Just place 
yourself before, and look up into His face ; think of 
His love, His wonderful, tender, pitying love. Just 
tell Him how sinful and cold and dark all is ; it is 
the Father's loving heart will give light and warmth 
to yours. O do what Jesus says : Just shut the door 
and pray to thy Father which is in secret. Is it not 
wonderful? to be able to go alone with God, the 
infinite God. And then to look up and say : My 
Father ! 

^^ And thy Father which seeth in secret^ will recom- 
pense theey Here Jesus assures us that secret 
prayer cannot be fruitless ; its blessing will show 
itself in our life. We have but in secret, alone with 
God, to entrust our life before men to Him ; He will 
reward us openly ; He will see to it that the answer 
27- 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

to prayer be made manifest in His blessing upon us. 
Our Lord would thus teach us that as infinite Father- 
liness and Faithfulness is that with which God meets 
us in secret, so on our part there should be the 
childlike simpHcity of faith, the confidence that 
our prayer does bringdown a blessing. "He that 
Cometh to God must believe that He is a rewarder 
of them that seek Him." Not on the strong or 
the fervent feehng with which I pray does the bless- 
ing of the closet depend, but upon the love and 
the power of the Father to whom I there entrust 
my needs. And therefore the Master has but one 
desire : Remember your Father is, and sees and 
hears in secret ; go there and stay there, and go again 
from there in the confidence : He will recompense. 
Trust Him for it ; depend upon Him ; prayer to 
the Father cannot be vain; He will reward you 
openly. 

Still further to confirm this faith in the Father-love 
of God, Christ speaks a third word : " Your Father 
knoweth what thmgs ye have need of bcfoj'e ye ask 
Him.'' At first sight it might appear as if this thought 
made prayer less needful ; God knows far better than 
we what we need. But as we get a deeper insight 
into what prayer really is, this truth will help much 
to 'strengthen our faith. It will teach us that we do 
not need, as the heathen, with the multitude and urg- 
ency of our words, to compel an unwilling God to 
listen to us. It will lead to a holy thoughtfulness and 
silence in prayer as it suggests the question : Does 
my Father really know that I need this ? It will, 
•28 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

when once we have been led by the Spirit to the cer- 
tainty that our request is indeed something that, 
according to the Word, we do need for God's glory, 
give us wonderful confidence to say, My Father 
knows I need it and must have it. And if there be 
any delay in the answer, it will teach us in quiet per- 
severance to hold on ; Father ! Thou knowest 
I need it. O the blessed liberty and simplicity of 
a child that Christ our Teacher would fain cultivate 
in us, as we draw near to God ; let us look up to 
the Father until His Spirit works it in us. Let 
us sometimes in our prayers, when we are in dan- 
ger of being so occupied with our fervent, urgent 
petitions, as to forget that the Father knows and 
hears, let us hold till and just quietly say : My Father 
sees, my Father hears, my Father knows ; it will 
help our faith to take the answer, and to say : We 
know that we have the petitions we have asked of 
Him. 

And now, all ye who have anew entered the school 
of Christ to be taught to pray, take these lessons, 
practice them, and trust Him to perfect you in them. 
Dwell much in the inner chamber, with the door 
shut — shut in from men, shut up with God : it is there 
the Father waits you, it is there Jesus will teach you 
to pray. To be alone in secret with the Father ; 
this be your highest joy. To be assured that the 
Father will openly reward the secret prayer, so that 
it cannot remain unblessed ; this be your strength 
day by day. And to know that the Father knows 
that you need what you ask ; this be your liberty to 
29 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

bring every need, in the assurance that your God will 
supply it according to His riches in glory in Christ 
Jesus. 

''Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Saviour! with my whole heart I do bless 
Thee for the appointment of the inner chamber, as 
the school where Thou meetest each of Thy pupils 
alone, and revealest to him the Father. O my Lord ! 
strengthen my faith so in the Father's tender love and 
kindness, that as often as I feel sinful or troubled , the 
first instinctive thought may be to go where I know 
the Father waits me, and where prayer never can go 
unblessed. Let the thought that He knows my need 
before I ask, bring me, in great restfulness of faith, 
to trust that He will give what His child requires. O 
let the place of secret prayer become to me the most 
beloved spot of earth. 

And, Lord ! hear me as I pray that Thou wouldest 
everywhere bless the closets of Thy believing peo- 
ple. Let Thy wonderful revelation of a Father's 
tenderness free all young Christians from every 
thought of secret prayer as a duty or a burden, 
and lead them to regard it as the highest privilege 
of their life, a joy and a blessing. Bring back all 
who are discouraged, because they cannot find ought 
to bring Thee in prayer. O give them to under- 
stand that they have only to come with their empti- 
ness to Him who has all to give, and delights to 
do it. Not, what they have to bring the Father, but 
30 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

what the Father waits to give them, be their one 
thought. 

And bless especially the inner chamber of all Thy 
servants who are working for Thee, as the place 
where God's truth and God's grace is revealed to 
them, where they are daily anointed with fresh oil, 
where their strength is renewed, and the blessings 
are received in faith, with which they are to bless 
their fellow-men. Lord, draw us all in the closet 
nearer to Thyself and the Father. Amen. 
31 



FOURTH LESSON. 

** After this manner pray ; " or the Model Prayer. 

After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father 
which art in heaven. — Matt. VI. 9. 

EVERY teacher knows the power of example. 
He not only tells the child what to do and how 
to do it, but shows him how it really can be done. 
In condescension to our weakness, our Heavenly 
Teacher has given us the very words we are to take 
with us as we draw near to our Father. We have 
in them a form of prayer in which there breathe the 
freshness and fulness of the Eternal Life. So simple 
that the child can lisp it, so divinely rich that it com- 
prehends all that God can give. A form of prayer 
that becomes the model and inspiration for all other 
prayer, and yet always draws us back to itself as the 
deepest utterance of our souls before our God. 

* ' Our Father which art in heaven ! ' ' To appre- 
ciate this word of adoration aright, I must remember 
that none of the saints had in Scripture ever ventured 
to address God as their Father. The invocation 
places us at once in the centre of the wonderful reve- 
lation the Son came to make of His Father as our 
Father, too. It comprehends the mystery of redemp- 
32 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

tion — Christ delivering us from the curse that we 
might become the children of God. The mystery of 
regeneration — the Spirit in the new birth giving us 
the new life. And the mystery of faith — ere yet the 
redemption is accomplished or understood, the word 
is given on the lips of the disciples to prepare them 
for the blessed experience still to come. The words 
are the key to the whole prayer, to all prayer. It 
takes time, it takes life to study them ; it will take 
eternity to understand them fully. The knowledge 
of God's Father-love is the first and simplest, but 
also the last and highest lesson in the school of 
prayer. It is in the personal relation to the living 
God, and the personal conscious fellowship of love 
with Himself that prayer begins. It is in the know- 
ledge of God's Fatherliness, revealed by the Holy 
Spirit, that the power of prayer will be found to root 
and grow. In the infinite tenderness and pity and 
patience of the infinite Father, in His loving readi- 
ness to hear and to help, the life of prayer has its joy. 
O let us take time, until the Spirit has made these 
words to us spirit and truth, filling heart and life ; 
"Our Father which art in heaven." Then we are 
indeed within the veil, in the secret place of power 
where prayer always prevails. 

^^ Hallowed be Thy name.^^ There is something 
here that strikes us at once. While we ordinarily 
first bring our own needs to God in prayer, and then 
think of what belongs to God and His interests, the 
Master reverses the order. First, Thy name, Thy 
kingdom, Thy will : then, give ics^ forgive us^ lead 
3 33 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

us, dehver 21s. The lesson is of more importance 
than we think. In true worship the Father must be 
first, must be all.' The sooner I learn to forget my- 
self in the desire that He may be glorified, the richer 
will the blessing be that prayer will bring to myself. 
No one ever loses by what he sacrifices for the Father. 

This must influence all our prayer. There are two 
sorts of prayer : personal and intercessory. The 
latter ordinarily occupies the lesser part of our time 
and energy. This may not be. Christ has opened 
the school of prayer specially to train intercessors 
for the great work of bringing down, by their faith 
and prayer, the blessings of His work and love on 
the world around. There can be no deep growth in 
prayer unless this be made our aim. The little child 
may ask of the father only what it needs for itself; 
and yet it soon learns to say, Give some for sister, 
too. But the grown-up son, who only lives for the 
father's interest and takes charge of the father's busi- 
ness, asks more largely, and gets all that is asked. 
And Jesus would train us to the blessed life of conse- 
cration and service, in which our interests are all 
subordinate to the Name, and the Kingdom, and the 
Will of the Father. O let us live for this, and let, 
on each act of adoration. Our Father ! there follow 
in the same breath, T/iy Name, T/iy Kingdom, T/iy 
Will ; — for this we look up and long. 

^^ Hallowed be Thy naine.'^ What name? This 

new name of Father. The word Holy is the central 

word of the Old Testament ; the name Father of the 

New. In this name of Love all the holiness and 

34 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

glory of God are now to be revealed. And how is 
the name to be hallowed? By God Himself: "/ 
will hallow My great name which ye have profaned." 
Our prayer must be that in ourselves, in all God's 
children, in presence of the world, God Himself 
would reveal the holiness, the Divine power, the 
hidden glory of the name of Father. The Spirit 
of the Father is the //t'/j/ Spirit ; it is only when we 
yield ourselves to be led of Him, that the name will 
be hallowed in our prayers and our lives. Let us 
learn the -prayer: "Our Father, hallowed be Thy 
name." 

" Thy kingdom corned The Father is a King and 
has a kingdom. The son and heir of a king has 
no higher ambition than the glory of his father's 
kingdom. In time of war or danger this becomes his 
passion ; he can think of nothing else. The children 
of the Father are here in the enemy's territory, 
where the kingdom, which is in heaven, is not yet 
fully manifested. What more natural than that, when 
they learn to hallow the Father-name, they should 
long and cry with deep enthusiasm, "Thy kingdom 
come." The coming of the kingdom is the one great 
event on which the revelation of the Father's glory, 
the blessedness of His children, the salvation of the 
world depends. On our prayers, too, the coming of 
the kingdom waits. Shall we not join in the deep 
longing cry of the redeemed : " Thy kingdom come ? " 
Let us learn it in the school of Jesus! 

" Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earths 
This petition is too frequently applied alone to the 
35 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

suffering of the will of God. In heaven God's will 
is done, and the Master teaches the child to ask that 
the will may be done on earth just as in heaven ; in 
the spirit of adoring submission and ready obedience. 
Because the will of God is the glory of heaven, the 
doing of it is the blessedness of heaven. As the 
will is done, the kingdom of heaven comes into the 
heart. And wherever faith has accepted the Father's 
love, obedience accepts the Father's will. The sur- 
render to, and the prayer for a life of heaven-like 
obedience, is the spirit of child-like prayer. 

" Give ns this day our daily bread.'''' When first 
the child has yielded himself to the Father in the 
care for His Name, His Kingdom, and His Will, he 
has full liberty to ask for his daily bread. A master 
cares for the food of his servant, a general of his 
soldiers, a father of his child. And will not the 
Father in heaven care for the child who has in prayer 
given himself up to His interests? We may, indeed, 
in full confidence say, ' ' Father, I live for Thy honor 
and Thy work ; I know Thou carest forme." Conse- 
cration to God and His will gives wonderful liberty 
in prayer for temporal things ; the whole earthly life 
is given to the Father's loving care. 

" Ajid forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven 
our debtors^ As bread is the first need of the body, 
so forgiveness for the soul. And the provision for 
the one is as sure as for the other. We are children, 
but sinners, too ; our right of access to the Father's 
presence we owe to the precious blood and the for- 
giveness it has won for us. Let us beware of the 
36 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

prayer for forgiveness becoming a formahty ; only 
what is really confessed is really forgiven. Let us in 
faith accept the forgiveness as promised ; as a 
spiritual reality, an actual transaction between God 
and us, it is the entrance into all the Father's love 
and all the privileges of children. Such forgiveness 
as a living experience, is impossible without a for- 
giving spirit to others; as forgiven expresses the 
heavenward, ^o forgiving the earthward, relation of 
God's child. In each prayer to the Father I must be 
able to say that I know of no one whom I do not 
heartily love. 

^^ And lead tis not into temptation, but deliver us 
from the evil one y Our daily bread, the pardon of 
our sins, and then our being kept from all sin and the 
power of the evil one, in these three petitions all our 
personal need is comprehended. The prayer for 
bread and pardon must be accompanied by the sur- 
render to live in all things in holy obedience to the 
Father's will, and the believing prayer in everything 
to be kept by the power of the indwelling Spirit from 
the power of the evil one. 

Children of God ! it is thus Jesus would have us to 
pray to the Father in heaven. O let His Name, and 
Kingdom, and Will, have the first place in our love ; 
His providing, and pardoning, and keeping love will be 
our sure portion. So the prayer will lead us up to 
the true child-life; the Father all to the child, the 
Father all for the child. We shall understand how 
Father and child, the Thine and the Our, are all one, 
and how the heart that begins its prayer with the 
37 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

God-devoted Thine, will have the power in faith to 
speak out the Our, too. Such praj^er will, indeed, 
be the fellowship and interchange of love, always 
bringing us back in trust and worship to Him who is 
not only the beginning, but the end: "For Thine 

IS THE KINGDOM, AND THE POWER, AND THE GLORY, 

FOREVER, Amen." Son of the Father, teach us to 
pray, "Our Father." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



O Thou who art the only begotten Son, teach us, 
we beseech Thee, to pray, "Our Father." We 
thank Thee, Lord, for these Living Blessed Words 
which Thou hast given us. We thank Thee for the 
millions who in them have learned to know and wor- 
ship the Father, and for what they have been to us. 
Lord ! it is as if we needed days and weeks in Thy 
school with each separate petition, so deep and full 
are they. But we look to Thee to lead us deeper 
into their meaning ; do it, we pray Thee, for Thy 
name's sake ; Thy name is Son of the Father. 

Lord ! Thou didst once say : " No man knoweth 
the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son 
willeth to reveal Him." And again : '' I made known 
unto them Thy name, and will make it known, that 
the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in 
them." Lord Jesus! reveal to us the Father. Let 
His name, His infinite Father-love, the love with 
which he loved Thee, according to Thy prayer, be 
38 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

IN us. Then shall we say aright, " Our Father ! " 
Then shall we apprehend Thy teaching, and the first 
spontaneous breathing of our heart will be: "Our 
Father, Thy Name, Thy Kingdom, Thy Will." And 
we shall bring our needs and our sins and our temp- 
tations to Him in the confidence that the love of such 
a Father cares for all. 

Blessed Lord ! we are Thy scholars, we trust Thee ; 
do teach us to pray, "Our Father." Amen. 
39 



FIFTH LESSON. 

" Ask, and it shall be given you: " or, Tlie Cer= 
tainty of the Answer to Prayer. 

Ask, and it shall be given yon; seek, and ye shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto yott; for every one that 
asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth ; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened. — Matt. vii. 7, 8. 

Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss. — ^Jas. 
iv. 3. 

OUR Lord returns here in the Sermon on the 
Mount a second time to speak of prayer. 
The first time He had spoken of the Father who is 
to be found in secret, and rewards openly, and had 
given us the pattern prayer (Matt. vi. 5-15). Here 
He wants to teach us what in all Scripture is consid- 
ered the chief thing in prayer ; the assurance that 
prayer will be heard and answered. Observe how 
He uses words which mean almost the same thing, 
and each time, repeats the promise so distinctly : 
"Ye shall receive, ye shall find, it shall be opened 
unto you ; " and then gives as ground for such assur- 
ance the law of the kingdom: "He that asketh, 
receiveth; he that seeketh, findeth; to him that 
knocketh, it shall be opened.''^ We cannot but feel 
40 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

how in this sixfold repetition He wants to impress 
deep on our minds this one truth, that we may and 
must most confidently expect an answer to our 
prayer. Next to the revelation of the Father's love, 
there is, in the whole course of the school of pra} er, 
not a more important lesson than this : Every one 
that asketh, receiveth. 

In the three words the Lord uses, ask, seek, knock, 
a difference in meaning has been sought. If such 
was indeed His purpose, then the first, Ask, refers 
to the gifts we pray for. But I may ask and receive 
the gift without the Giver. Seek is the word Scrip- 
ture uses of God Himself; Christ assures me that I 
can find Himself But it is not enough to find God 
in time of need, without coming to abiding fellow- 
ship : Knock speaks of admission to dwell with 
Him and in Him. Asking and receiving the gift 
would thus lead to seeking and finding the Giver, 
and this again to the knocking and opening of the 
door of the Father's home and love. One thing is 
sure : the Lord does want us to count most certainly 
on it that asking, seeking, knocking, cannot be in 
vain ; receiving an answer, finding God, the opened 
heart and home of God, are the certain fruit of 
prayer. 

That the Lord should have thought it needful in 
so many forms to repeat the truth, is a lesson of deep 
import. It proves that He knows our heart, how 
doubt and distrust toward God are natural to us, and 
how easily we are inclined to rest in prayer as a reli- 
gious work without an answer. He knows too how, 
41 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

even when we believe that God is the hearer of prayer, 
beheving prayer that lays hold of the promise, is 
something spiritual, too high and difficult for the half- 
hearted disciple. He therefore at the very outset of 
His instruction to those who would learn to pray, 
seeks to lodge this truth deep into their hearts : 
prayer does avail much ; ask and ye shall receive ; 
eveiy one that asketh, receiveth. This is the fixed 
eternal law of the kingdom ; if you ask and receive 
not, it must be because there is something amiss or 
wanting in the prayer. Hold on ; let the Word and 
Spirit teach you to pray aright, but do not let go the 
confidence He seeks to waken : Every one that ask- 
eth, receiveth. 

"Ask, and it shall be given you.^^ Christ has no 
mightier stimulus to persevering prayer in His school 
than this. As a child has to prove a sum to be cor- 
rect, so the proof that we have prayed aright is, the 
atiswer. If we ask and receive not, it is because we 
have not learned to pray aright. Let every learner 
in the school of Christ therefore take the Master's 
word in all simplicity : Every one that asketh, receiv- 
eth. He had good reasons for speaking so uncondi- 
tionally. Let us beware of weakening the Word 
with our human wisdom. When He tells us heavenly 
things, let us believe Him ; His Word will explain 
itself to him who believes it fully. If questions and 
difficulties arise, let us not seek to have them settled 
before we accept the Word. No ; let us entrust them 
all to Him ; it is His to solve them ; our work is 
first and fully to accept and hold fast His promise. 
42 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Let in our inner chamber, in the inner chamber of 
our heart too, the Word be inscribed in letters of 
light : Every one that asketh, receiveth. 

According to this teaching of the Master, prayer 
consists of two parts, has two sides, a human and a 
Divine. The human is the asking, the Divine is the 
giving. Or, to look at both from the human side, 
there is the asking and the receiving — the two halves 
that make up a whole. It is as if He would tell us 
that we are not to rest without an answer, because 
it is the will of God, the rule in the Father's family : 
every childlike believing petition is granted. If no 
answer comes, we are not to sit down in the sloth 
that calls itself resignation, and suppose that it is not 
God's will to give an answer. No ; there must be 
something in the prayer that is not as God would 
have it, childlike and believing: we must seek for 
grace to pray so that the answer may come. It is 
far easier to the flesh to submit without the answer 
than to yield itself to be searched and purified by 
the Spirit, until it has learned to pray the prayer of 
faith. 

It is one of the terrible marks of the diseased state 
of Christian life in these days, that there are so many 
who rest content without the distinct experience of 
answer to prayer. They pray daily, they ask many 
things, and trust that some of them will be heard, but 
know little of direct, definite answer to prayer as the 
rule of daily life. And it is this the Father wills : He 
seeks daily intercourse with his children in listening 
to and granting their petitions. He wills that I should 
43 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

come to Him day by day with distinct requests ; He 
wills day by day to do for me what I ask. It was 
in His answer to prayer that the saints of old learned 
to know God as the Living One, and were stirred to 
praise and love (Ps. xxxiv., Ixvi. 19, cxvi. i). Our 
Teacher waits to impirnt this upon our minds : 
prayer and its answer, the child asking and the father 
giving, belong to each other. 

There may be cases in which the answer is a refu- 
sal, because' the request is not according to God's 
Word, as when Moses asked to enter Canaan. But 
still, there was an answer; God did not leave His 
servant in uncertainty as to His will. The gods of the 
heathen are dumb and cannot speak. Our Father lets 
His child know when He cannot give him what he 
asks, and he withdraws his petition, even as the Son 
did in Gethsemane. Both Moses the servant and 
Christ the Son knew that what they asked was not 
according to what the Lord had spoken ; their prayer 
was the humble supplication whether it was not pos- 
sible for the decision to be changed. God will teach 
those who are teachable and give Him time, by His 
Word and Spirit, whether their request be according 
to His will or not. Let us withdraw the request, if it 
be not according to God's mind, or persevere till the 
answer come. Prayer is appointed to obtain the 
answer. It is in prayer and its answer that the inter- 
change of love between the Father and His child 
takes place. 

How deep the estrangement of our heart from 
God must be, that we find it so difficult to grasp such 
44 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

promises. Even while we accept the words and 
believe their truth, the faith of the heart, that fully 
has them and rejoices in them, comes so slowly. It 
is because our spiritual life is still so weak, and the 
capacity for taking God's thoughts is so feeble. But 
let us look to Jesus to teach us as none but He can 
teach. If we take His words in simplicity, and trust 
Him by His Spirit to make them within us life and 
power, they will so enter into our inner being, that 
the spiritual Divine reality of the truth they con- 
tain will indeed take possession of us, and we 
shall not rest content until every petition we offer is 
borne heavenward on Jesus' own words: "Ask, and 
it shall be given you." 

Beloved fellow-disciples in the school of Jesus! 
let us set ourselves to learn this lesson well. Let 
us take these words just as they were spoken. Let 
us not suflfer human reason to weaken their force. 
Let us take them as Jesus gives them, and believe 
them. 

He will teach us in due time how to under- 
stand them fully ; let us begin by implicitly believing 
them. Let us take time, as often as we pray, to 
listen to his voice : Every one that asketh, receiveth. 
Let us not make the feeble experiences of our unbe- 
lief the measure of what our faith may expect. Let 
us seek, not only just in our seasons of prayer, but 
at all times, to hold fast the joyful assurance : man's 
prayer on earth and God's answer in heaven are 
meant for each other. Let us trust Jesus to teach us 
so to pray that the answer can come. He will do it 
45 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

if we hold fast the word He gives to-day: " Ask, and 
ye shall receive." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



O Lord Jesus ! teach me to understand and believe 
what Thou hast now promised me. It is not hid 
from Thee, O my Lord, with what reasonings my 
heart seeks to satisfy itself when no answer comes. 
There is the thought that my prayer is not in harmony 
with the Father's secret counsel ; that there is, per- 
haps, something better Thou wouldest give me ; or 
that prayer as fellowship with God is blessing enough 
without an answer. And yet, my blessed Lord, I 
find in Thy teaching on prayer that Thou didst not 
speak of these things, but didst say so plainly, that 
prayer may and must expect an answer. Thou dost 
assure us that this is the fellowship of a child with 
the Father : the child asks and the Father gives. 

Blessed Lord ! Thy words are faithful and true. 
It must be because I pray amiss that my experience 
of answered prayer is not clearer. It must be because 
I live too little in the Spirit, that my prayer is too 
little in the Spirit, and that the power for the prayer 
of faith is wanting. 

Lord ! teach me to pray. Lord Jesus ! I trust 
Thee for it ; teach me to pray in faith. Lord ! teach 
me this lesson of to-day: Every one that asketh, 
receiveth. Amen. 

46 



SIXTH I.ESSON. 

** How much more?" or, The Infinite Fatherli- 
ness of God. 

Or what i?ian is there of you, who, if his son ask him 
for a loaf will give hitn a stone ; or if he shall ask for a 
fish^ will give him a serpent ? If ye^ then, being evil^ 
know how to give good gifts tinto your children^ how mtuh 
more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things 
to them that ask Him ? — Matt. vii. 9-1 1. 

IN these words our Lord proceeds further to con- 
firm what He had said of the certainty of an 
answer to prayer. To remove all doubt, and show 
us on what sure ground His i^romise rests, He appeals 
to what every one has seen and experienced here on 
earth. We are all children, and know what we ex- 
pected of our fathers. We are fathers, or continually 
see them; and every where we look upon it as the 
most natural thing there can be, for a father to hear 
his child. And the Lord asks us to look up from 
earthly parents, of whom the best are but evil, and 
to calculate how much more the heavenly Father 
will give good gifts to them that ask Him. Jesus 
would lead us up to see that as much greater as God 
is than sinful man, so much greater our assurance 
ought to be that He will more surely than any earthly 
47 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

father grant our childlike petitions. As much greater 
as God is than man, so much surer is it that prayer 
will be heard with the Father in heaven than with a 
father on earth. 

As simple and intelligible as this parable is, so 
deep and spiritual is the teaching it contains. The 
Lord would remind us that the prayer of a child owes 
its influence entirely to the relation in which he 
stands to the parent. The prayer can exert that 
influence only when the child is really living in that 
relationship in the home, in the love, in the service 
of the Father. The power of the promise, "Ask, 
and it shall be given you," lies in the loving relation- 
ship between us as children and the Father in hea- 
ven ; when we live and walk in that relationship, 
the prayer of faith and its answer will be the natural 
result. And so the lesson we have to-day in the 
school of prayer is this: Live as a child of God, 
then you will be able to pray as a child, and as a 
child you will most assuredly be heard. 

And what is the true child-life ? The answer can 
be found in any home. The child that by preference 
forsakes the father's house, that finds no pleasure in 
the presence and love and obedience of the father, 
and still thinks to ask and obtain what he will, will 
surely be disappointed. On the contrary, he to 
whom the intercourse and will and honor and love 
of the father are the joy of his life, will find that it is 
the father's joy to grant his requests. Scripture says : 
"As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are 
the children of God:" the childlike privilege of 
48 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

asking all is inseparable from the child-like life 
under the leading of the Spirit. He that gives him- 
self to be led by the Spirit in his life, will be led by 
Him in his prayers, too. And he will find that 
Fatherlike giving is the Divine response to childlike 
living. 

To see what this childlike living is, in which child- 
like asking and believing have their ground, we have 
only to notice what our Lord teaches in the Sermon 
on the Mount of the Father and His children. In it 
the prayer-promises are imbedded in the life-precepts ; 
the two are inseparable. They form one whole, and 
he alone can count on the fulfilment of the promise, 
who accepts, too, all that the Lord has connected 
with it. It is as if in speaking the word, " Ask, and 
ye shall receive," He says, I give these promises to 
those whom in the beatitudes I have pictured in their 
childlike poverty and purity, and of whom I have 
said, "They shall be called the children of God" 
(Matt. v. 3-9) : to children who " let your light shine 
before men that they may glorify your Father in 
heaven: " to those who walk in love, **that ye may 
be children of your Father which is in heaven," and 
who seek to be perfect, * ' even as your Father in 
heaven is perfect ' ' (v. 45) : to those whose fasting 
and prayer and almsgiving (vi. 1-18) is not before 
men, but "before your Father which seeth in secret ; " 
who forgive, " even as your Father forgiveth you" 
(vi. 15); who trust the heavenly Father in all earthly 
need, seeking first the kingdom of God and His 
righteousness (vi. 26-32) ; who not only say, Lord, 
4 49 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Lord, but do the will of my Father which is in hea- 
ven (vii. 2i). Such are the children of the Father, 
and such is the life in the Father's love and service : in 
such a childlife answered prayers are certain and 
abundant. 

But will not such teaching discourage the feeble 
one? If we are first to answer to this portrait of a 
cliild, must not many give up all hope of answers to 
prayer ? The difficulty is removed if we think again 
of the blessed name of father and child. A child is 
weak ; there is a great difference among children in 
age and gift. The Lord does not demand of us a 
perfect fulfilment of the law ; no, but only the childlike 
and whole-hearted surrender to live as a child with 
Him in obedience and truth. Nothing more. But, 
also, nothing less. The Father must have the wholQ 
heart. When this js given, and He sees the child 
with honest purpose and steady will seeking in every- 
thing to be and live as a child, then our prayer will 
count with Him as the prayer of a child. Let any 
one simply and honestly begin to study the Sermon 
on the ]\Iount and take it as his guide in life, and he 
will find, notwithstanding weakness and failure, an 
ever-growing liberty to claim the fulfilment of its 
promises in regard to prayer. In the names of father 
and child he has the pledge that his petitions will be 
granted. 

This is the one chief thought on which Jesus dwells 

here, and which He would have all His scholars take 

in. He would have us see that the secret of effectual 

prayer is : to have the heart filled with the Father-love 

50 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of God. It is not enough for us to know that God is 
a Father : He would have us take time to come 
under the full impression of what that name implies. 
We must take the best earthly father we know ; we 
must think of the tenderness and love with which he 
regards the request of his child, the love and joy with 
which he grants every reasonable desire ; we must 
then, as we think in adoring worship of the infinite 
Love and Fatherliness of God, consider with hozv 
much more tenderness and joy He sees us come to 
Him, and gives us what we ask aright. And then, 
when we see how much this Divine arithmetic is 
beyond our comprehension, and feel how impossible 
it is for us to apprehend God's readiness to hear us, 
then He would have us come and open our heart for 
the Holy Spirit to shed abroad God's Father-love 
there. Let us do this not only when we want to pray, 
but let us yield heart and life to dwell in that love. 
The child who only wants to know the love of the 
father when he has something to ask, will be disap- 
pointed. But he who lets God be Father always and 
in everything, who would fain live his whole life in 
the Father's presence and love, who allows God in 
all the greatness of His love to be a Father to him, 
oh ! he will experience most gloriously that a life in 
God's infinite Fatherliness and continual answers to 
prayer are inseparable. 

Beloved fellow- disciple ! we begin to see what the 

reason is that we know so little of daily answers to 

prayer, and what the chief lesson is which the Lord 

has for us in His school. It is all in the name of 

51 



Willi Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Father. We thought of new and deeper insight into 
some of the mysteries of the prayer- world as what 
we should get in Christ's school ; He tells us the first 
is the highest lesson ; we must learn to say well, 
"Abba, Father!" "Our Father which art in 
heaven." He that can say this, has the key to all 
prayer. In all the compassion with which a father 
listens to his weak or sickly child, in all the joy with 
which he hears his stammering child, in all the gentle 
patience with which he bears with a thoughtless 
child, we must, as in so many mirrors, study the 
heart of our Father, until every prayer be borne up- 
ward on the faith of this Divine word: ^'Hozu much 
more shall your heavenly Father give good gifts to 
them that ask Him." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! Thou knowest that this, though it 
be one of the first and simplest and most glorious 
lessons in Thy school, is to our hearts one of the 
hardest to learn: we know so little of the love of the 
Father. Lord ! teach us so to live with the Father 
that His love may be to us nearer, clearer, dearer, 
than the love of any earthly father. And let the 
assurance of His hearing our prayer be as much 
greater than the confidence in an earthly parent, as 
the heavens are higher than earth, as God is infinitely 
greater than man. Lord ! show us that it is only our 
unchildlike distance from the Father that hinders the 
52 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

answer to prayer, and lead us on to the true life 
of God's children. Lord Jesus ! it is fatherhke love 
that wakens childlike trust. O reveal to us the 
Father, and His tender, pitying love, that we may 
become childlike, and experience how in the child- 
life lies the power of prayer. 

Blessed Son of God ! the Father loveth Thee and 
hath given Thee all things. And Thou lovest the 
Father, and hast done all things He commanded 
Thee, and therefore hast the power to ask all things. 
Lord ! give us Thine own Spirit, the Spirit of the 
Son. Make us childlike, as Thou wert on earth. 
And let every prayer be breathed in the faith that as 
the heaven is higher than the earth, so God's Father- 
love, and His readiness to give us what we ask, sur- 
passes all we can think or conceive. Amen. 



NOTE.i 

" Yotir Father which is in heaven.''^ Alas ! we 
speak of it only as the utterance of a reverential 
homage. We think of it as a figure borrowed from 
an earthly life, and only in some faint and shallow 
meaning to be used of God. We are afraid to take 
God as our own tender and pitiful father. He is a 
schoolmaster, or almost farther off than that, and 

1 From Thoughts on Holiness, by Mark Guy Pearse. What is 
so beautifully said of the knowledge of God's Fatherliness as 
the starting-point of holiness is no less true of prayer. 

53 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

knowing less about us— an inspector, who knows 
nothing of us except through our lessons. His eyes 
are not on the scholar, but on the book, and all alike 
must come up to the standard. 

Now open the ears of the heart, timid child of 
God ; let it go sinking right down into the innermost 
depths of the soul. Here is the starting-point of holi- 
ness, in the love and patience and pity of our heavenly 
Father. We have not to learn to be holy as a hard 
lesson at school, that we may make God think well 
of us ; we are to learn it at home with the Father to 
help us. God loves you not because you are clever, 
not because you are good, but because He is your 
Father. The Cross of Christ does not make God 
love us ; it is the outcome and measure of His love 
to us. He loves all His children, the clumsiest, the 
dullest, the worst of His children. His love lies at 
the back of everything, and we must get upon that as 
the solid foundation of our religious life, not growing 
up into that, but growing up out of it. We must begin 
there or our beginning will come to nothing. Do 
take hold of this mightily. We must go out of our- 
selves for any hope, or any strength, or any confi- 
dence. And what hope, what strength, what confi- 
dence, may be ours now that we begin here, your 
Father which is ifi heaven / 

We need to get in at the tenderness and helpful- 
ness which lie in these words, and to rest upon it— 
your Father. Speak them over to yourself until 
something of the wonderful truth is felt by us. It 
means that I am bound to God by the closest and 
54 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

tenderest relationship ; that I have a right to His love 
and His power and His blessing, such as nothing else 
could give me. O the boldness with which we can 
draw near ! O the great things we have a right to 
ask for ! Your Father. It means that all His 
infinite love and patience and wisdom bend over me 
to help vie. In this relationship lies not only the 
possibility of holiness ; there is infinitely more than 
that. 

Here we are to begin, in the patient love of our 
Father. Think how he knows us apart and by our- 
selves, in all our peculiarities, and in all our weak- 
nesses and difficulties. The master judges by the 
result, but our Father judges by the effort. Failure 
does not always mean fault. He knows how much 
things cost, and weighs them where others only 
measure. Your Father. Think how great store 
His love sets by the poor beginnings of the little 
ones, clumsy and unmeaning as they may be to 
others. All this lies in this blessed relationship and 
infinitely more. Do not fear to take it all as your 
own. 

55 



SEVENTH I.ESSON. 

**How much more the Holy Spirit;*' or, The 
AlI=Comprehensive Gift. 

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto 
your children, how much more shall the heavenly Father 
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him ? — LuKE xi. 13. 

IN the Sermon on the Mount, the Lord had ah'eady 
given utterance to His wonderful How much 
MORE ? Here in Luke, where He repeats the ques- 
tion, there is a difference. Instead of speaking, as 
then, of giving good gifts, He says, " How much 
more shall the heavenly Father give the Holy 
Spirit? " He thus teaches us that the chief and the 
best of these gifts is the Holy Spirit, or rather, that 
in this gift all others are comprised. The Holy Spirit 
is the first of the Father's gifts, and the one He 
delights most to bestow. The Holy Spirit is therefore 
the gift we ought first and chiefly to seek. 

The unspeakable worth of this gift we can easily 
understand. Jesus spoke of the Spirit as "-the 
promise of the Father;" the one promise in which 
God's Fatherhood revealed itself. The best gift a 
good and wise father can bestow on a child on earth 
is his own spirit. This is the great object of a father 
56 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

in education— to reproduce in his child his own dis- 
position and character. If the child is to know and 
understand his father ; if, as he grows up, he is to 
enter into all his will and plans ; if he is to have his 
highest joy in the father, and the father in him, — he 
must be of one mind and spirit with him. And so it 
is impossible to conceive of God bestowing any 
higher gift on His child than this, His own Spirit. 
God is what He is through His Spirit; the Spirit 
is the very life of God. Just think what it means — 
God giving His own Spirit to His child on earth. 

Or was not this the glory of Jesus as a Son upon 
earth, that the Spirit of the Father was in Him ? At 
His baptism in Jordan the two things were united, — 
the voice, proclaiming Him the Beloved Son, and the 
Spirit, descending upon Him. And so the Apostle 
says of us, " Because ye are sons, God sent forth the 
Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, 
Father." A king seeks in the whole education of 
his son to call forth in him a kingly spirit. Our 
Father in heaven desires to educate us as His chil- 
dren for the holy, heavenly life in which He dwells, 
and for this gives us, from the depths of His heart, 
His own Spirit. It was this which was the whole aim 
of Jesus when, after having made atonement with 
His own blood. He entered for us into God's pres- 
ence, that He might obtain for us, and send down to 
dwell in us, the Holy Spirit. As the Spirit of the 
Father, and of the Son, the whole life and love of the 
Father and the Son are in Him ; and coming down 
into us, He lifts us up into their fellowship. As Spirit 
57 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of the Father, He sheds abroad the Father's love, 
with which He loved the Son, in our hearts, and 
teaches us to live in it. As Spirit of the Son, He 
breathes in us the childlike liberty, and devotion, and 
obedience in which the Son lived upon earth. The 
Father can bestow no higher or more wonderful gift 
than this : His own Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Son- 
ship. 

This truth naturally suggests the thought that this 
first and chief gift of God must be the first and chief 
object of all prayer. For every need of the spiritual 
life this is the one thing needful : the Holy Spirit. 
All the fulness is in Jesus ; the fulness of grace and 
truth, out of which we receive grace for grace. The 
Holy Spirit is the appointed conveyancer, whose 
special work it is to make Jesus and all there is in 
Him for us ours in personal appropriation, in blessed 
experience. He is the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus ; 
as wonderful as the life is, so wonderful is the provi- 
sion by which such an agent is provided to commu- 
nicate it to us. If we but yield ourselves entirely to 
the disposal of the Spirit, and let Him have His way 
with us, He will manifest the life of Christ within us. 
He will do this with a Divine power, maintaining the 
life of Christ in us in uninterrupted continuity. Surely, 
if there is one prayer that should draw us to the 
Father's throne and keep us there, it is this : for the 
Holy Spirit, whom we as children have received, to 
stream into us and out from us in greater fulness. 

In the variety of the gifts which the Spirit has to 
to dispense. He meets the believer's every need. 
58 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Just think of the names He bears. The Spirit of 
grace, to reveal and impart all of grace there is in 
Jesus. The Spirit of faith, teaching us to begin and 
go on and increase in ever believing. The Spirit of 
adoption and assurance, who witnesses that we are 
God's children, and inspires the confiding and confi- 
dent Abba, Father ! The Spirit of truth to lead into 
all truth, to make each word of God ours in deed and 
in truth. The Spirit of prayer, through whom we 
speak with the Father ; prayer that must be heard. 
The Spirit of judgment and burning, to search the 
heart and convince of sin. The Spirit of holiness, 
manifesting and communicating the Father's holy 
presence within us. The Spirit of power, through 
whom we are strong to testify boldly and work effec- 
tually in the Father's service. The Spirit of glory, 
the pledge of our inheritance, the preparation and 
the foretaste of the glory to come. Surely the child 
of God needs but one thing to be able really to live as 
a child : it is to be filled with this Spirit. 

And now, the lesson Jesus teaches us to-day in His 
school is this; That the Father is just longing to give 
Him to us if we will but ask in the childlike depend- 
ence on what He says : " If ye know to give good 
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
Him." In the words of God's promise, * ' I will pour 
out my Spirit abimdantly ; " and of His command, 
'' Be ye filled with the Spirit," we have the measure 
of what God is ready to give, and what we may obtain. 
As God's children, we have already received the 
59 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Spirit. But we still need to ask and pray for His 
special gifts and operations as we require them. 
And not only this, but for Himself to take complete 
and entire possession ; for His unceasing momentary 
guidance. Just as the branch, already filled with the 
sap of the vine, is ever crying for the continued and 
increasing flow of that sap, that it may bring its fruit 
to perfection, so the believer, rejoicing in the posses- 
sion of the Spirit, ever thirsts and cries for more. 
And what the great Teacher would have us learn is, 
that nothing less than God's promise and God's com- 
mand may "be the measure of our expectation and 
our prayer ; we must be filled abundantly. He would 
have us ask this in the assurance that the wonderful 
HOW MUCH MORE of God's Father-love is the pledge 
that, when we ask, we do most certainly receive. 

Let us now believe this. As we pray to be filled 
with the Spirit, let us not seek for the answer in our 
feelings. All spiritual blessings must be received, 
that is, accepted or taken in faith. ^ Let me believe, 
the Father gives the Holy Spirit to His praying child. 
Even now, while I pray, I must say in faith : I have 
what I ask, the fulness of the Spirit is mine. Let us 
continue steadfast in this faith. On the strength of 
God's Word we know that we have what we ask. 
Let us, with thanksgiving that we have been heard, 

1 The Greek word for receiving and taking is the same. 
"When Jesus said, " Kvery one that asketh, receiveth,'" He used 
the same verb as at the Supper, " Take, eat," or on the resur- 
rection morning, '''■Receive,'^ accept, take, "the Holy Spirit." 
Receiving not only implies God's bestowment, but our accept- 
ance. 

60 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

with thanksgiving for what we have received and 
taken and now hold as ours, continue steadfast in 
believing prayer that the blessing, which has already 
been given us, and which we hold in faith, may break 
through and fill our whole being. It is in such 
believing thanksgiving and prayer, that our soul 
opens up for the Spirit to take entire and undis- 
turbed possession. It is such prayer that not only 
asks and hopes, but takes and holds, that inherits 
the full blessing. In all our prayer let us remember 
the lesson the Saviour would teach us this day, that, 
if there is one thing 07t earth we can be sure of, it is 
this, that the Father desires to have tis filled with His 
Spirit, that He delights to give us His Spirit. 

And when once we have learned thus to believe for 
ourselves, and each day to take out of the treasure 
we hold in heaven, what liberty and power to pray 
for the outpouring of the Spirit on the Church of 
God, on all flesh, on individuals, or on special efforts ! 
He that has once learned to know the Father in 
prayer for himself, learns to pray most confidently for 
others too. The Father gives the Holy Spirit to 
them that ask Him, not least, but most, when they 
ask for others. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Father in heaven ! Thou didst send Thy Son to 
reveal Thyself to us, thy Father-love, and all that 
that love has for us. And He has taught us, that the 
6i 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

gift above all gifts which Thou wouldest bestow in 
answer to prayer is, the Holy Spirit. 

O my Father ! I come to Thee with thi prayer ; 
there is nothing I would— may I not s /, I do — 
desire so much as to be filled with th Spirit, the 
Holy Spirit. The blessings He brir , are so un- 
speakable, and just what I need. H . .:.neds abroad 
Thy love in the heart, and fills it ,.'ith Thyself, I 
long for this. He breathes the mind and life of 
Christ in me, so that I live as He did, in and for the 
Father's love. I long for this. He endues with 
power from on high for all my walk and work. I 
long for this. O Father ! I beseech Thee, give me 
this day the fulness of Thy Spirit. 

Father ! I ask this, resting on the words of my 
Lord: "How much more .^he Holy Spirit." I 
do believe tha"^. Thou hearest my prayer ; I receive 
now what I ask; Father! x jlaim and I take it; the 
fulness of Thy Spirit as n-' I receive the gift this 

day again as a faith gift ; in faith I reckon my Father 
works through the Spirit all V? has promised. The 
Father delights to breathe His Spirit into His wait- 
ing child as He tarries in fellowship with Himself. 
Amen. 

62 



EIGHTH LESSON. 

" Because of his importunity : '* or, The Boldness 
of God's Friends. 

And He said unto thei?i, Which of you shall have A 
FRIEND, and shall go to him at midnight, and say to him. 
Friend, lend me three loaves ; for a friend of mine is 
come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before 
him ; and he from within shall answer and say, Trouble 
me not : the door is now shut, and my children are with me 
in bed ; I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you 
though he will not rise and give hv?i because he is HIS 
friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and 
give him, as piany as he needeth. — LUKE Xi. 5-8. 

THE first teaching lo his disciples was given by- 
cur Lord in tlie Sermon on the Mount. It was 
near a year later that the disciples asked Jesus to 
teach them to pray. In answer He gave them a 
second time the Lord's Prayer, so teaching them 
what to pray. He then speaks of how they ought to 
pray, and repeats what he formerly said of God's 
Fatherliness and the certainty of an answer. But in 
between He adds the beautiful parable of the friend 
at midnight, to teach them the two-fold lesson, that 
God does not only want us to pray for ourselves, but 
63 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

for the perishing around us, and that in such interces- 
sion great boldness of entreaty is often needful, and 
always lawful, yea, pleasing to God. 

The parable is a perfect storehouse of instruction 
in regard to true intercession. There is, first, the 
love which seeks to help the needy around us : " ;«_y 
friend is come to me." Then the need which urges 
to the cry: '' I have nothing to set before him." 
Then follows the confidence that help is to be had : 
"which of you shall have Sl. friend ^ and say, Frietid, 
lend me three loaves." Then comes the unexpected 
refusal; " I can7iot rise and give thee." Then again 
\}i\Q perseverance \}a?i\.\.2ik.^^ no refusal: "because of 
his importimity.'^ And lastly, the reward of such 
prayer: " he will give him as many as he needeth^ 
A wonderful setting forth of the way of prayer and 
faith in which the blessing of God has so often been 
sought and found. 

Let us confine ourselves to the chief thought; 
prayer as an appeal to the friendship of God ; and 
we shall find that two lessons are specially suggested. 
The one, that if we are God's friends, and come as 
such to Him, we must prove ourselves the friends of 
the needy ; God's friendship to us and ours to others 
go hand in hand. The other, that when we come 
thus we may use the utmost liberty in claiming an 
answer. 

There is a two-fold use of prayer: the one, to 

obtain strength and blessing for our own life ; the 

other, the higher, the true glory of prayer, for which 

Christ has taken us into his fellowship and teaching, 

64 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

is intercession, where prayer is the royal power a 
child of God exercises in heaven on behalf of others 
and even of the kingdom. We see it in Scripture, 
how it was in intercession for others that Abraham 
and Moses, Samuel and Elijah, with all the holy men 
of old, proved that they had power with God and 
prevailed. It is when we give ourselves to be a 
blessing that we can specially count on the blessing 
of God. It is when we draw near to God as the 
friend of the poor and the perishing that we may 
count on His friendliness ; the righteous man who is 
the friend of the poor is very specially the friend of 
God. This gives wonderful liberty in prayer. Lord ! 
I have a needy friend whom I must help. As a 
friend I have undertaken to help him. In Thee I 
have a Friend whose kindness and riches I know to 
be infinite ; I am sure Thou wilt give me what I ask. 
If I, being evil, am ready to do for my friend what I 
can, how much more wilt Thou, O my heavenly 
Friend, now do for Thy friend what he asks? 

The question might suggest itself, whether the 
Fatherhood of God does not give such confidence 
in prayer that the thought of His friendship can 
hardly teach us anything more : a father is more than 
a friend. And yet, if we consider it, this pleading 
the friendship of God opens new wonders to us. 
That a child obtains what he asks of his father looks 
so perfectly natural, we almost count it the father's 
duty to give. But with a friend it is as if the kindness 
is more free, dependent, not on nature, but on sym- 
pathy and character. And then the relation of a 
5 65 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

child is more that of perfect dependence ; two friends 
are more nearly on a level. And so our Lord, in 
seeking to unfold to us the spiritual mystery of 
prayer, would fain have us approach God in this 
relation, too, as those whom He has acknowledged 
as His friends, whose mind and life are in sympathy 
with His. 

But then we must be living as His friends. I am 
still a child, even when a wanderer ; but friendship 
depends upon the conduct. "Ye are my friends if 
ye do whatsoever I command you." "Thou seest 
that faith wrought with his works, and by works was 
faith made perfect ; and the scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, And Abraham believed God, and he was 
called the frieftd of God.^^ It is the Spirit, *' the 
same Spirit," that leads us, that also bears witness 
to our acceptance with God; ^^ likewise, also," the 
same Spirit helpeth us in prayer. It is a life as the 
friend of God that gives the wonderful liberty to 
say, I have a friend to whom I can go even at mid- 
night. And how much more when I go in the very 
spirit of that friendliness, manifesting myself the very 
kindness I look for in God, seeking to help my 
friend as I want God to help me. When I come to 
God in prayer. He always looks to what the aim 
is of my petition. If it be merely for my own comfort 
or joy I seek His grace, I do not receive. But if I 
can say that it is that He may be glorified in my dis- 
pensing His blessings to others, I shall not ask in 
vain. Or if I ask for others, but want to wait until 
God has made me so rich that it is no sacrifice or 
66 



With Christ in the School of Prayer, 

act of faith to aid them, I shall not obtain. But if I 
can say that I have already undertaken for my needy 
friend, that in my poverty I have already begun the 
work of love, because I know I had a friend who 
would help me, my prayer will be heard. Oh, we 
know not how much the plea avails ; the friendship 
of earth looking in its need to the friendship of hea- 
ven : " He will give him as much as he needeth." 

But not always at once. The one thing by which 
man can honor and enjoy his God isy«zV/z. Intercession 
is part of faith's training school. There our friend- 
ship with men and with God is tested. There it is 
seen whether my friendship with the needy is so real 
that I will take time and sacrifice my rest, will go 
even at midnight and not cease until I have obtained 
for them what I need. There it is seen whether my 
friendship with God is so clear that I can depend on 
Him not to turn me away, and therefore pray on 
until He gives. 

O what a deep heavenly mystery this is of perse- 
vering prayer. The God who has promised, who 
longs, whose fixed purpose it is to give the blessing, 
holds it back. It is to Him a matter of such deep 
importance that His friends on earth should know 
and fully trust their rich Friend in heaven, that He 
trains them, in the school of answer delayed, to find 
out how their perseverance really does prevail, and 
what the mighty power is they can wield in heaven, 
if they do but set themselves to it. There is a faith 
that sees the promise and embraces it, and yet does 
not receive it (Heb. xi. 13, 39). It is when the an- 
67 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

swer to prayer does not come, and the promise we 
are most firmly trusting appears to be of none effect, 
that the trial of faith, more precious than of gold, 
takes place. It is in this trial that the faith that has 
embraced the promise is purified and strengthened 
and prepared in personal holy fellowship with the 
living God to see the glory of God. It takes and 
holds the promise until it has received the fulfilment 
of what it had claimed in a living truth in the unseen 
but living God. 

Let each child of God who is seeking to work the 
work of love in his Father's service take courage. 
The parent with his child, the teacher with his class, 
the visitor with his district, the Bible reader with his 
circle, the preacher with his hearers, each one who, in 
in his little circle, has accepted and is bearing the 
burden of hungry, perishing souls,— let them all take 
courage. Nothing is at first so strange to us as that 
God should really require persevering prayer, that 
there should be a real spiritual needs-be for impor- 
tunity. To teach it us, the Master uses this almost 
strange parable. If the unfriendliness of a selfish 
earthly friend can be conquered by importunity, 
how much more will it avail with the heavenly 
Friend, who does so love to give, but is held back by 
our spiritual unfitness, our incapacity to posses what 
He has to give. O let us thank Him that in delaying 
His answer He is educating us up to our true posi- 
tion, and the exercise of all our power with Him, 
training us to live with Him in the fellowship of un- 
doubting faith and trust, to be indeed the friends of 
68 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

God. And let us hold fast the three-fold cord that 
cannot be broken : the hungry friend needing the 
help, and the praying friend seeking the help, and 
the Mighty Friend, loving to give as much as he 
needeth. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



O my Blessed Lord and Teacher ! I must come to 
Thee in prayer. Thy teaching is so glorious, and 
yet too high for me to grasp. I must confess that my 
heart is too little to take in these thoughts of the 
wonderful boldness I may use with Thy Father as my 
Friend. Lord Jesus ! I trust Thee to give me Thy 
Spirit with Thy Word, and to make the Word quick 
and powerful in my heart. I desire to keep Thy 
Word of this day: " Because of his importunity he 
will give him as many as he needeth." 

Lord ! teach me more to know the power of per- 
severing prayer. I know that in it the Father suits 
Himself to our need of time for the inner life to attain 
its growth and ripeness, so that His grace may indeed 
be assimilated and made our very own. I know that 
He would fain thus train us to the exercise of that 
strong faith that does not let Him go even in the face 
of seeming disappointment. I know He wants to 
lift us to that wonderful liberty, in which we under- 
stand how really He has made the dispensing of His 
gift dependent on our prayer. Lord ! I know this : O 
teach me to see it in spirit and truth. 
69 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

And may it now be the joy of my life to become 
the almoner of my Rich Friend in heaven, to care 
for all the hungry and perishing, even at midnight, 
because I know my Friend, who always gives to him 
who perseveres, because of his importunity, as many 
as he needeth. Amen. 

70 



NINTH LESSON. 

«* Pray the Lord of the harvest ; '* or, Prayer pro- 
vides Laborers. 

Then saith He unto His disciples^ The harvest truly is 
plenteous^ but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the 
Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth laborers into 
into His harvest. — Matt. ix. 37-38. 

THE Lord frequently taught His disciples that 
they must pray, and how ; but seldom what to 
pray. This He left to their sense of need, and the 
leading of the Spirit. But here we have one thing 
He expressly enjoins them to remember : in view 
of the plenteous harvest, and the need of reapers, 
they must cry to the Lord of the harvest to send forth 
laborers. Just as in the parable of the friend at mid- 
night. He would have them understand that prayer is 
not to be selfish; so here it is the power through 
which blessing can come to others. The Father is 
Lord of the harvest ; when we pray for the Holy 
Spirit, we must pray for Him to prepare and send 
forth laborers for the work. 

Strange, is it not, that He should ask His disciples 
to pray for this ? And could He not pray Himself? 
And would not one prayer of His avail more than a 
71 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

thousand of theirs ? And God, the Lord of the har- 
vest, did He not see the need? And would not He, 
in His own good time, send forth laborers without 
their prayer ? Such questions lead us up to the deepest 
mysteries of prayer, and its power in the Kingdom 
of God. The answer to such questions will convince 
us that prayer is indeed a power, on which the in- 
gathering of the harvest and the coming of the 
Kingdom do in very truth depend. 

Prayer is no form or show. The Lord Jesus was 
Himself the truth ; everything He spake was the 
deepest truth. It was when (see ver. 36) "He saw 
the multitude, and was moved with compassion on 
them, because the)'- were scattered abroad, as sheep 
having no shepherd," that He called on the disciples 
to pray for laborers to be sent among them. He did 
so because He really believed that their prayer was 
needed, and would help. The veil which so hides the 
invisible world from us was wonderfully transparent 
to the holy human soul of Jesus. He had looked 
long and deep and far into the hidden connection of 
cause and effect in the spirit world. He had marked 
in God's Word how, when God called men like 
Abraham and ]\Ioses, Joshua and Samuel and Daniel, 
and given them authority over men in His name, He 
had at the same time given them authority and right 
to call in the powers of heaven to their aid as they 
needed them. He knew that as to these men of old, 
and to Himself for a time, here upon earth, the work 
of God had been entrusted, so it was now about to 
pass over into the hands of His disciples. He knew 
72 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

that when this work should be given in charge to 
them, it would not be a mere matter of form or show, 
but that on them, and their being faithful or unfaith- 
ful, the success of the work would actually depend. 
As a single individual, within the limitations of a 
human body and a human life, Jesus feels how little 
a short visit can accomplish among these wandering 
sheep He sees around Him, and He longs for help to 
have them properly cared for. And so He tells His 
disciples now to begin and pray, and, when they have 
taken over the work from Him on earth, to make 
this one of the chief petitions in their prayer : That 
the Lord of the harvest Himself would send forth 
laborers into His harvest. The God who entrusted 
them with the work, and made it to so large extent 
dependent on them, gives them authority to apply to 
Him for laborers to help, and makes the supply 
dependent on their prayer. 

How little Christians really feel and mourn the 
need of laborers in the fields of the world so white to 
the harvest. And how little they beheve that our 
labor-supply depends on prayer, that prayer will 
really provide "as many as he needeth." Not that 
the dearth of labor is not known or discussed. Not 
that efforts are not sometimes put forth to supply the 
want. But how little the burden of the sheep wan- 
dering without a Shepherd is really borne in the faith 
that the Lord of the harvest will, in answer to prayer, 
send forth the laborers, and in the solemn conviction 
that without this prayer fields ready for reaping wiU 
be left to perish. And yet it is so. So wonderful is 
73 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the surrender of His work into the hands of His 
Church, so dependent has the Lord made Himself on 
them as His body, through whom alone His work 
can be done, so real is the power which the Lord 
gives His people to exercise in heaven and earth, 
that the number of the laborers and the measure of 
the harvest does actually depend upon their prayer. 

Solemn thought ! O why is it that we do not obey 
the injunction of the Master more heartily, and cry 
more earnestly for laborers ? There are two reasons 
for this. The one is : We miss the compassion of 
Jesus, which gave rise to this request for prayer. 
When believers learn that to love their neighbors as 
themselves, that to live entirely for God's glory in 
their fellow-men, is the Father's first commandment 
to His redeemed ones, they will accept of the perish- 
ing ones as the charge entrusted to them by their 
Lord. And, accepting them not only as a field of 
labor, but as the objects of loving care and interest, 
it will not be long before compassion towards the 
hopelessly perishing will touch their heart, and the 
cry ascend with an earnestness till then unknown : 
Lord ! send laborers. The other reason for the 
neglect of the command, the want of faith, will then 
make itself felt, but will be overcome as our pity 
pleads for help. We believe too little in the power 
of prayer to bring about definite results. We do not 
live close enough to God, and are not enough entirely 
given up to His service and Kingdom, to be capable 
of the confidence that He will give it in answer to 
our prayer. O let us pray for a life so one with 
74 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Christ, that His compassion may stream into us, and 
His Spirit be able to assure us that our prayer avails. 

Such prayer will ask and obtain a twofold blessing. 
There will first be the desire for the increase of men 
entirely given up to the service of God. It is a terri- 
ble blot upon the Church of Christ that there are 
times when actually men cannot be found for the 
service of the Master as ministers, missionaries, or 
teachers of God's Word. As God's children make 
this a matter of supplication for their own circle or 
Church, it will be given. The Lord Jesus is now 
Lord of the harvest. He has been exalted to bestow 
gifts — the gifts of the Spirit. His chief gifts are men 
filled with the Spirit. But the supply and distribution 
of the gifts depend on the co-operation of Head and 
members. It is just prayer will lead to such co-opera- 
tion ; the believing suppliants will be stirred to find 
the men and the means for the work. 

The other blessing to be asked will not be less. 
Every believer is a laborer ; not one of God's children 
who has not been redeemed for service, and has not 
his work waiting. It must be our prayer that the 
Lord would so fill all His people with the spirit of de- 
votion, that not one may be found standing idle in 
the vineyard. Wherever there is a complaint of the 
want of helpers, or of fit helpers in God's work, 
prayer has the promise of a supply. There is no 
Sunday-school or district visiting, no Bible reading or 
rescue work, where God is not ready and able to 
provide. It may take time and importunity, but the 
command of Christ to ask the Lord of the harvest is 
75 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the pledge that the prayer will be heard : *' I say unto 
you, he will arise and give him as many as he 
needeth." 

Solemn, blessed thought ! this power has been 
given us in prayer to provide in the need of the world, 
to secure the servants for God's work. The Lord of 
the harvest will hear. Christ, who called us so 
specially to pray thus, will support our prayers offered 
in His name and interest. Let us set apart time and 
give ourselves to this part of our intercessory work. 
It will lead us into the fellowship of that compassion- 
ate heart of His that led Him to call for our prayers. 
It will elevate us to the insight of our regal position, 
as those whose will counts for something with the 
great God in the advancement of His Kingdom. It 
will make us feel how really we are God's fellow- 
workers on earth, to whom a share in His work has 
in down-right earnest been entrusted. It will maks us 
partakers in the soul travail, but also in the soul satis- 
faction of Jesus, as we know how, in answer to our 
prayer, blessing has been given that otherwise would 
not have come. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! Thou hast this day again given us 
another of Thy wondrous lessons to learn. We 
humbly ask Thee, O give us to see aright the spiritual 
realities of which Thou hast been speaking. There 
is the harvest which is so large, and perishing, as it 
76 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

waits for sleepy disciples to give the signal for 
laborers to come. Lord, teach us to look out upon it 
with a heart moved with compassion and pity. There 
are the laborers, so few. Lord, show us how terrible 
the sin of the want of prayer and faith, of which this 
is the token. And there is the Lord of the harvest, 
so able and ready to send them forth. Lord, show us 
how He does indeed wait for the prayer to which He 
has bound His answer. And there are the disciples, 
to whom the commission to pray has been given : 
Lord, show us how Thou canst pour down Thy Spirit 
and breathe upon them, so that Thy compassion and 
the faith in Thy promise shall rouse them to unceas- 
ing, prevailing prayer. 

O our Lord ! we cannot understand how Thou 
canst entrust such work and give such power to men 
so slothful and unfaithful. We thank Thee for all 
whom Thou art teaching to cry day and night for 
laborers to be sent forth. Lord, breathe Thine own 
Spirit on all Thy children, that they may learn to live 
for this one thing alone — the Kingdom and glory of 
their Lord — and become fully awake to the faith 
of what their prayer can accomplish. And let all our 
hearts in this, as in every petition, be filled with 
the assurance that prayer, offered in loving faith in 
the living God, will bring certain and abundant 
answer. Amen. 

77 



TENTH LESSON. 
*« What wilt thou ? " or, Prayer must be Definite. 

And Jesus answered him, and said, What tvilt thou that 
2 should do unto thee ? — Mark x. 51 ; LuKE xviii. 41. 

THE blind man had been crying out aloud, and 
that a great deal, " Thou Son of David, have 
mercy on me." The cry had reached the ear of the 
Lord ; He knew what he wanted, and was ready to 
grant it him. But ere He does it, He asks him: 
•' What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? " He 
wants to hear from his own lips, not only the general 
petition for mercy, but the distinct expression of what 
his desire was. Until he speaks it out, he is not 
healed. 

There is now still many a suppliant to whom the 
Lord puts the same question, and who cannot until it 
has been answered, get the aid he asks. Our prayers 
must not be a vague appeal to His mercy, an in- 
definite cry for blessing, but the distinct expression 
of definite need. Not that His loving heart does not 
understand our cry, or is not ready to hear. But He 
desires it for our own sakes. Such definite prayer 
teaches us to know our own needs better. It de- 
78 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

mands time, and thought, and self -scrutiny to find out 
what really is our greatest need. It searches us and 
puts us to the test as to whether our desires are 
hones L and real, such as we are ready to persevere in. 
It leads us to judge whether our desires are according 
to God's Word, and whether we really believe that 
we shall receive the things we ask. It helps us to 
wait for the special answer, and to mark it when 
it comes. 

And yet how much of our prayer is vague and 
pointless. Some cry for mercy, but take not the 
trouble to know what mercy must do for them. 
Others ask, perhaps, to be delivered from sin, but do 
not begin by bringing any sin by name from which 
the deliverance may be claimed. Still others pray 
for God's blessing on those around them, for the out- 
pouring of God's Spirit on their land or the world, 
and yet have no special field where they wait and 
expect to see the answer. To all the Lord says : 
And what is it now you really want and expect Me to 
do ? Every Christian has but limited powers, and as 
he must have his own special field of labor in which 
he works, so with his prayers too. Each believer has 
his own circle, his family, his friends, his neighbors. 
If he were to take one or more of these by name, he 
would find that this really brings him into the train- 
ing-school of faith, and leads to personal and pointed 
dealing with his God. It is when in such distinct 
matters we have in faith claimed and received 
answers, that our more general prayers will be be- 
lieving and effectual. 

79 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

We all know with what surprise the whole civilized 
world heard of the way in which trained troops were 
repulsed by the Transvaal Boers at Majuba. And to 
what did they owe their success ? In the armies of 
Europe the soldier fires upon the enemy standing in 
large masses, and never thinks of seeking an aim for 
every bullet. In hunting game the Boer had learned 
a different lesson ; his practised eye knew to send 
every bullet on its special message, to seek and find 
its man. Such aiming must gain the daym the spirit- 
ual world too. As long as in prayer we just pour 
out our hearts in a multitude of petitions, without 
taking time to see whether every petition is sent with 
the purpose and expecj i of getting an answer, 
not many will reach the mark. But if, as in silence 
of soul we bow before the Lord, we were to ask such 
questions as these : What is now really my desire ? do 
I desire it in faith, expecting to receive ? am I now 
ready to place and leave it in the Father's bosom ? is 
it a settled thing between God and me that I am to 
have the answer ? we should learn so to pray that 
God would see and we would know what we really 
expect. 

It is for this, among other '"^asons, that the Lord 
warns us against the vain repetitions of the Gentiles, 
who think to be heard for their much praying. We 
often hear prayers of great earnestness and fervor, in 
which a multitude of petitions are poured forth, but 
to which the Saviour would undoubtedly answer 
" What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ? " If I 
am in a strange land, in the interests of the business 
80 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

which my father owns, I would certainly write two 
different sorts of letters. There will be family letters 
giving expression to all the intercourse to which 
aflfection prompts ; and there will be business letters, 
containing orders for what I need. And there may 
be letters in which both are found. The answers 
will correspond to the letters. To each sentence of 
the letters containing the family news I do not ex- 
pect a special answer. But for each order I send I 
am confident of an answer whether the desired article 
has been forwarded. In our dealings with God the 
business element must not be wanting. With our 
expression of need and s'-^. of love and faith and 

consecration, there must le pointed statement of 

what we ask and expect to receive; it is in the 
answer that the Father loves to give us the token of 
His approval and acceptance. 

But the word of the Master teaches us more. He 
does not say, What dost thou wish ? but, What dost 
thou will? One often wishes for a thing without 
willing it. I wish to have a certain article, but I find 
the price too high ; I resolve not to take it ; I wish, 
but do not will to have it. The sluggard wishes to 
be rich, but does not v, ill it. Many a one wishes to 
be saved, but perishes because he does not will it. 
The will rules the whole heart and life ; if I really 
will to have anything that is within my reach, I do 
not rest till I have it. And so, when Jesus says to us, 
"What wilt thou?" He asks whether it is indeed 
our purpose to have what we ask at any price, how- 
ever great the sacrifice. Dost thou indeed so will to 
6 8i 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

have it that, though He delay it long, thou dost not 
hold thy peace till He hear thee ? Alas ! how many 
prayers are wishes, sent up for a short time and then 
forgotten, or sent up year after year as matter of duty, 
while we rest content with the prayer without the 
answer. 

But, it may be asked, is it not best to make our 
wishes known to God, and then to leave it to Him 
to decide what is best, without seeking to assert our 
will ? By no means. This is the very essence of the 
prayer of faith, to which Jesus sought to train His 
disciples, that it does not only make known its 
desire and then leave the decision to God. That 
would be the prayer of submission, for cases in which 
we cannot know God's will. But the prayer of faith, 
finding God's will in some promise of the Word, 
pleads for that till it come. In Matthew (ix. 28) 
we read Jesus said to the blind man : ''Believe ye 
that I can do this?" Here, in Mark, He says : " What 
wilt thou that I should do? " In both cases He said 
that faith had saved them. And so He said to the 
Syrophenician woman, too : ''Great is ihy faith ; be 
it unto thee even as thou wilt.'''' Faith is nothing 
but the purpose of the will resting on God's word, 
and saying : I must have it. To believe truly is to 
will firmly. 

But is not such a will at variance with our depend- 
ence on God and our submission to Him ? By no 
means; it is much rather the true submission that 
honors God. It is only when the child has yielded 
his own will in entire surrender to the Father, that he 
82 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

receives from the Father liberty and power to will 
what he would have. But, when once the believer 
has accepted the will of God, as revealed through 
the Word and Spirit, as his will, too, then it is the 
will of God that His child should use this renewed 
will in His service. The will is the highest power in 
the soul ; grace wants above everything to sanctify 
and restore this will, one of the chief traits of God's 
image, to full and free exercise. As a son, who only 
lives for his father's interests, who seeks not his own 
but his father's will, is trusted by the father with his 
business, so God speaks to His child in all truth, 
"What wilt thou?" It is often spiritual sloth that, 
under the appearance of humility, professes to have 
no will, because it fears the trouble of searching out 
the will of God, or, when found, the struggle of 
claiming it in faith. True humility is ever in com- 
pany with strong faith, which only seeks to know 
what is according to the will of God, and then boldly 
claims the fulfilment of the promise. " Ye shall ask 
what ye willy and it shall be done unto you." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Lord Jesus ! teach me to pray with all my heart 
and strength, that there may be no doubt with Thee 
or with me as to what I have asked. May I so know 
what I desire that, even as my petitions are recorded 
in heaven, I can record them on earth too, and note 
each answer as it comes. And may my faith in what 
83 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Thy Word has promised be so clear that the Spirit 
may indeed work in me the liberty to will that it shall 
come. Lord ! renew, strengthen, sanctify wholly my 
will for the work of effectual prayer. 

Blessed Saviour ! I do beseech Thee to reveal to 
me the wonderful condescension Thou showest us, 
thus asking us to say what we will that Thou 
shouldest do, and promising to do whatever we will. 
Son of God ! I cannot understand it; I can only 
believe that Thou hast indeed redeemed us wholly 
for Thyself, and dost seek to make the will, as our 
noblest part, Thy most efficient servant. Lord ! I 
do most unreservedly yield my will to Thee, as the 
power through which Thy Spirit is to rule my whole 
being. Let Him take possession of it, lead it into 
the truth of Thy promises, aud make it so strong in 
prayer that I may ever hear Thy voice saying : 
"Great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou 
wilt." Amen. 

84 



ELEVENTH LESSON. 

••Believe that ye have received ; " or, The Faith 
that Takes. 

Therefore I say ttnto you, All things whatsoever ye pray 
and ask for, believe that ye have received them, and ye shall 
have them. — MARK xi. 24. 

WHAT a promise ! so large, so Divine, that our 
little hearts cannot take it in, and in every 
possible way seek to limit it to what we think safe or 
probable ; instead of allowing it, in its quickening 
power and energy, just as He gave it, to enter in, and 
to enlarge our hearts to the measure of what His 
love and power are really ready to do for us. Faith 
is very far from being a mere conviction of the truth 
of God's word, or a conclusion drawn from certain 
premises. It is the ear which has heard God say 
what He will do, the eye which has seen Him doing 
it, and, therefore, where there is true faith, it is im- 
possible but the answer must come. If we only see 
to it that we do the one thing that He asks of us as 
we pray: 'Q'eia^yk that ye have received ; He will see 
to it that He does the thing He has promised : " Ye 
shall have them.'''' The key-note of Solomon's 
prayer (2 Chron. vi. 4), '"' Blessed be the Lord God 
85 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of Israel, who hath with His hands fulfilled that which 
He spake with His viouth to my father David," is the 
key-note of all true prayer: the joyful adoration of a 
God whose hand always secures the fulfilment of 
what His mouth hath spoken. Let us in this spirit 
listen to the promise Jesus gives ; each part of it has 
its Divine message. 

'^ All things whatsoever y At this first word our 
human wisdom at once begins to doubt and ask; 
This surely cannot be literally true? But if it be not, 
why did the Master speak it, using the very strongest 
expression He could find: "All things whatsoever." 
And it is not as if tliis were the only time He spoke 
thus ; is it not He who also said, " If thou canst be- 
lieve, ALL THINGS are possible to him that believeth ; " 
" If ye have faith, nothing shall be impossible to 
you." Faith is so wholly the work of God's Spirit 
through His word in the prepared heart of the be- 
lieving disciple, that it is impossible that the fulfil- 
ment should not come ; faith is the pledge and 
forerunner of the coming answer. Yes, " all things 
WHATSOEVER ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye 
received The tendency of human reason is to inter- 
pose here, and with certain qualifying clauses, " if 
expedient," " if according to God's will," to break 
the force of a statement which appears dangerous. O 
let us beware of dealing thus with the Master's words. 
His promise is most literally true. He wants His oft- 
repeated " ALL things" to enter into our hearts, and 
reveal to us how mighty the power of faith is, how 
truly the Head calls the members to share with Him 
86 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

in His power, how wholly our Father places His 
power at the disposal of the child that wholly trusts 
Him. In this "all things " faith is to have its food 
and strength : as we weaken it we weaken faith. The 
WHATSOEVER is Unconditional : the only condition is 
what is implied in the believing. Ere we can believe 
we must find out and know what God's will is ; 
believing is the exercise of a soul surrendered and 
given up to the influence of the Word and the 
Spirit; but when once we do believe nothing shall be 
impossible. God forbid that we should try and bring 
down His all things to the level of what we think 
possible. Let us now simply take Christ's '' what- 
soever " as the measure and the hope of our faith : 
it is a seed-word which, if taken just as He gives it, 
and kept in the heart, will unfold itself and strike 
root, fill our life with its fullness, and bring forth 
fruit abundantly. 

"All things whatsoever ye pray ajid ask for.'''' It 
is in prayer that these " all things " are to be brought 
to God, to be asked and received of Him. The faith 
that receives them is the fruit of the prayer. In one 
aspect there must be faith before there can be prayer ; 
in another the faith is the outcome and the growth of 
prayer. It is in the personal presence of the Saviour, 
in intercourse with Him, that faith rises to grasp what 
at first appeared too high. It is in prayer that we 
hold up our desire to the light of God's Holy Will, 
that our motives are tested, and proof given whether 
we ask indeed in the name of* Jesus, and only for the 
glory of God. It is in prayer that we wait for the 
S7 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

leading of the Spirit to show us whether we are 
asking the right thing and in the right spirit. It is in 
prayer that we become conscious of our want of 
faith, that we are led on to say to the Father that we 
do believe, and that we prove the reality of our faith 
by the confidence with which we persevere. It is in 
prayer that Jesus teaches and inspires faith. He that 
waits to pray, or loses heart in prayer, because he 
does not yet feel the faith needed to get the answer, 
will never learn to believe. He who begins to pray 
and ask will find 'the Spirit of faith is given nowhere 
so surely as at the foot of the Throne. 

" Believe that ye have received." It is clear that 
what we are to believe is, that we receive the very 
things we ask. The Saviour does not hint that be- 
cause the Father knows what is best He may give us 
something else. The very mountain faith bids depart 
is cast into the sea. There is a prayer in which, in 
everything, we make known our requests with prayer 
and supplication, and the reward is the sweet peace 
of God keeping heart and mind. This is the prayer 
of trust. It has reference to things of which we 
cannot find out if God is going to give them. As 
children we make known our desires in the countless 
things of daily life, and leave it to the Father to give 
or not as He thinks best. But the prayer of faith of 
which Jesus speaks is something different, something 
higher. When, whether in the greater interests of tlie 
Master's work, or in the lesser concerns of our daily 
life, the soul is led to see how there is nothing that so 
honors the Father as the faith that is assured that He 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

will do what He has said in giving us whatsoever we 
ask for, and takes its stand on the promise as brought 
home by the Spirit, it may know most certainly that 
it does receive exactly what it asks. Just see how 
clearly the Lord sets this before us in verse 23: 
"Whosoever shall not doubt in his heart, but shall 
believe that what he saith cometh to pass, he shall 
have it." This is the blessing of the prayer of faith 
of which Jesus speaks. 

" Believe that ye have recived.'' This is the word 
of central importance, of which the meaning is too 
often misunderstood. Believe that you have received ! 
now, while praying, the thing you ask for. It may 
only be later that 3'ou shall have it in personal 
experience, that you shall see what you believe ; but 
now, without seeing, you are to believe that it has 
been given you of the Father in heaven. The receiv- 
ing or accepting of an answer to prayer is just like the 
receiving or accepting of Jesus or of pardon, a 
spiritual thing, an act of faith apart from all feeling. 
When I come as a supplicant for pardon, I believe 
that Jesus in heaven is for me, and so I receive or take 
Him. When I come as a supplicant for any special 
gift, which is according to God's word, I believe that 
what I ask is given me : I believe that I have it, I 
hold it in faith ; I thank God that it is mine. " If we 
know that He heareth us, whatsoever we ask, we 
know that we have the petitions which we have asked 
of Him." 

''Afidye shall have thein.^'' That is, the gift which 
we first hold in faith as bestowed upon us in heaven 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

will also become ours in personal experience. But 
will it be needful to pray longer if once we know we 
have been heard and have received what we asked ? 
There are cases in which such prayer will not be need- 
ful, in which the blessing is ready to break through at 
once, if we but hold fast our confidence, and prove 
our faith by praising for what we have received, in 
the face of our not yet having it in experience. There 
are other cases in which the faith that has received 
needs to be still further tried and strengthened in 
persevering prayer. God only knows when every- 
thing in and around us is fully ripe for the manifesta- 
tion of the blessing that has been given to faith. 
Elijah knew for certain that rain would come ; God 
had promised it ; and yet he had to pray the seven 
times. And that prayer was no show or play ; an in- 
tense spiritual reality in the heart of him who lay 
pleading there, and in the heaven above where it had 
its effectual work to do. It is "through faith and 
patience we inherit the promises." Faith says most 
confidently, I have received it. Patience perseveres 
in prayer until the gift bestowed in heaven is seen on 
earth. "Believe that ye have receivedy and ye shall 
havey Between the have received in heaven, and the 
shall have of earth, believe ; believing praise and 
prayer is the link. 

And now, remember one thing more: It is Jesus 
who said this. As we see heaven thus opened to us, 
and the Father on the Throne ofTering to give us 
whatsoever we ask in faith, our hearts feel full of 
shame that we have so little availed ourselves of our 
90 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

privilege, and full of fear lest our feeble faith still fail 
to grasp what is so clearly placed within our reach. 
There is one thing must make us strong and full 
of hope : it is Jesus who has brought us this message 
from the Father. He Himself, when He was on 
earth, lived the life of faith and prayer. It was when 
the disciples expressed their surprise at what He had 
done to the fig-tree, that He told them that the very 
same life He led could be theirs ; that they could not 
only command the fig-tree, but the very mountain, 
and it must obey. And He is our life : all He was on 
earth He is in us now ; all He teaches He really 
gives. He is Himself the Author and the Perfecter 
of our faith : He gives the spirit of faith ; let us not 
be afraid that such faith is not meant for us. It is 
meant for every child of the Father; it is within 
reach of each one who will but be childlike, yielding 
himself to the Father's Will and Love, trusting the 
Father's Word and Power. Dear fellow-Christian ! 
let the thought that this word comes through Jesus, 
the Son, our Brother, give us courage, and let our 
answer be: Yea, Blessed Lord, we do believe Thy 
Word, we do believe that we receive. 

" Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! Thou didst come from the Father 

to show us all His Love, and all the treasures of 

blessing that Love is waiting to bestow. Lord ! 

Thou hast this day again flung the gate so wide 

91 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

open, and given us such promises as to our liberty in 
prayer, that we must blush that our poor hearts have 
so little taken it in. Is has been too large for us to 
believe. 

Lord ! we now look up to Thee to teach us to take 
and keep and use chis precious word of Tliine : " All 
things whatsoever ye ask, believe that ye have re- 
ceived." Blessed Jesus ! it is Thyself in whom our 
faith must be rooted if it is to grow strong. Thy 
work has freed us wholly from the power of sin, and 
opened the way to the Father ; Thy Love is ever 
longing to bring us into the full fellowship of Thy 
glory and power; Thy Spirit is ever drawing us up- 
ward into a life of perfect faith and confidence ; we 
are assured that in Thy teaching we shall learn to 
pray the prayer of faith. Thou wilt train us to pray 
so that we believe that we receive, to believe that we 
really have what we ask. Lord ! teach me so to 
know and trust and love Thee, so to live and abide 
in Thee, that all my prayers rise up and come before 
God in Thee, and that my soul may have in Thee 
the assurance that I am heard. Amen. 
92 



TWBIvFTH I.ESSON. 

♦«Have faith in God;" or, The Secret of Be- 
lieving Prayer. 

Jesus^ answering, said unto thetn, HAVE FAITH IN GoD. 
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not doubt in his 
hearty but shall believe that what He saith cometh to pass ; 
he shall have it, Therefo7'e I say unto you, All things 
whatsoever ye pray a7id ask for, believe that ye have received 
them, and ye shall have them, — Mark xi. 22-24. 

THE promise of answer to prayer which formed 
our yesterday's lesson is one of the most won- 
derful in all Scripture. In how many hearts it has 
raised the question, How ever can I attain the faith 
that knows that it receives all it asks ? 

It is this question our Lord would answer to-day. 
Ere He gave that wonderful promise to His disciples, 
He spoke another word, in which He points out 
where the faith in the answer to prayer takes its rise, 
and ever finds its strength. Have faith in God : 
this word precedes the other, Have faith in the pro- 
mise of an answer to prayer. The power to believe 
a promise depends entirely, but only, on faith in ike 
promiser. Trust in the person begets trust in his 
word. It is only where we live and associate with 
93 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

God in personal, loving intercourse, where God 
Himself is all to us, where our whole being is con- 
tinually opened up and exposed to the mighty influ- 
ences that are at work where His Holy Presence is 
revealed, that the capacity will be developed for be- 
lieving that He gives whatever we ask. 

This connection between faith in God and faith in 
His promise will become clear to us if we think what 
faith really is. It is often compared to the hand or 
the mouth, by which we take and appropriate what 
is offered to us. But it is of importance that we 
should understand that faith is also the ear by which 
I hear what is promised, the eye by which I see what 
is offered me. On this the power to take depends. 
I must hear the person who gives me the promise : 
the very tone of his voice gives me courage to be- 
lieve. I must see him : in the light of his eye and 
countenance all fear as to my right to take passes 
away. The value of the promise depends on the 
promiser : it is on my knowledge of what the pro- 
miser is that faith in the promise depends. 

It is for this reason that Jesus, ere He gives that 
wonderful prayer-promise, first says, " Have faith 
IN God." That is, let thine eye be open to the 
Living God, and gaze on Him, seeing Him who is 
Invisible. It is through the eye that I yield myself 
to the influence of what is before me ; I just allow it 
to enter, to exert its influence, to leave its impression 
upon my mind. So believing God is just looking to 
God and what He is, allowing Him to reveal His 
presence, giving Him time and yielding the whole 
94 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

being to take in the full impression of what He is as 
God, the soul opened up to receive and rejoice in 
the overshadowing of His love. Yes, faith is the eye 
to which God shows what He is and does ; through 
faith the light of His presence and the workings of 
His mighty power stream into the soul. As that 
which I see lives in me, so by faith God lives in 
me, too. 

And even so faith is also the ear through which 
the voice of God is always heard and intercourse 
with Him kept up. It is through the Holy Spirit the 
Father speaks to us ; the Son is the Word, the sub- 
stance of what God says; the Spirit is the living 
voice. This the child of God needs to lead and guide 
him; the secret voice from heaven must teach him, 
as it taught Jesus, what to say and what to do. An 
ear opened toward God, that is, a believing heart 
waiting on Him to hear what He says, will hear Him 
speak. The words of God will not only be the words 
of a Book, but, proceeding from the mouth of God, 
they will be spirit and truth, life and power. They 
will bring in deed and living experience what are 
otherwise only thoughts. Through this opened ear 
the soul tarries under the influence of the life and 
power of God Himself As the words I hear enter 
the mind and dwell and work there, so through faith 
God enters the heart, and dwells and works there. 

When faith now is in full exercise as eye and ear, 

as the faculty of the soul by which we see and hear 

God, then it will be able to exercise its full power as 

hand and mouth, by which we appropriate God and 

95 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

His blessings. The power of reception will depend 
entirely on the power of spiritual perception. For 
this reason Jesus said, ere He gave the promise that 
God would answer believing prayer, "Have faith 
IN God." Faith is simply surrender : I yield myself 
to the impression the tidings I hear make on me. 
By faith I yield myself to the living God. His glory 
and love fill my heart, and have the mastery over my 
life. Faith is fellowship ; I give myself up to the 
influence of the friend who makes me a promise, and 
become linked to him by it. And it is when we 
enter into this living fellowship with God Himself, in 
a faith that always sees and hears Him, that it be- 
comes easy and natural to believe His promise as to 
prayer. Faith in the promise is the fruit of faith in 
the promiser ; the prayer of faith is rooted in the life 
of faith. And in this way the faith that prays effect- 
ually is indeed a gift of God. Not as something that 
He bestows or infuses at once, but in a far deeper 
and truer sense, as the blessed disposition or habit of 
soul which is wrought and grows up in us in a life of 
intercourse with Him. Surely for one who knows his 
Father well, and lives in constant close intercourse 
with Him, it is a simple thing to believe the promise 
that He will do the will of His child who lives in 
union with Himself. 

It is because very many of God's children do not 
understand this connection between the life of faith 
and the prayer of faith that their experience of the 
power of prayer is so limited. When they desire 
earnestly to obtain an answer from God, they fix 
96 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

their whole heart upon the promise, and try their 
utmost to grasp that promise in faith. When they 
do not succeed, they are ready to give up hope ; the 
promise is true, but it is beyond their power fo take 
hold of it in faith. Listen to the lesson Jesus teaches 
us this day : Have faith in God, the Living God ; 
let faith look to God more than the thing promised ; 
it is His love. His power, His living presence will 
waken and work the faith. A physician would say 
to one asking for some means to get more strength 
in his arms and hands to seize and hold, that his 
whole constitution must be built up and strengthened. 
So the cure of a feeble faith is alone to be found in 
the invigoration of our whole spiritual life by inter- 
course with God. Learn to believe in God, to take 
hold of God, to let God take possession of thy life, 
and it will be easy to take hold of the promise. He 
that knows and trusts God finds it easy to trust the 
promise, too. 

Just note how distinctly this comes out in the saints 
of old. Every special exhibition of the power of 
faith was the fruit of a special revelation of God. 
See it in Abraham: "And the zu or d of the Lord came 
unto Abram, saying. Fear not, Abram; / am thy 
shield. And He broicght him forth abroad, and said 
. . . And HE BELIEVED THE Lord." And later again: 
"The Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, I 
am God Almighty. And Abram fell on his face, and 
God talked with him, saying, As for Me, behold my 
covenant is with thee." It was the revelation of 
God Himself that gave the promise its living power 
7 97 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

to enter the heart and work the faith. Because 
they knew God these men of faith could not do 
anything but trust His promise. God's promise 
will be to us what God Himself is. It is the man 
who walks before the Lord, and falls upon his face 
to listen while the living God speaks to him, who 
will really receive the promise. Though we have 
God's promises in the Bible, with full liberty to take 
them, the spiritual power is wanting, except as God 
Himself speaks them to us. And He speaks to those 
who walk and live ivith Him. Therefore, Have 
FAITH IN God: let faith be all eye and ear, the 
surrender to let God make His full impression, and 
reveal Himself fully in the soul. Count it one of the 
chief blessings of prayer to exercise faith in God, as 
the Living Mighty God, who waits to fulfill in us all 
the good pleasure of His will, and the work of faith 
with power. See in Him the God of Love, whose 
delight it is to bless and impart Himself. In such 
worship of faith in God the power will speedily come 
to believe the promise, too: '' All things whatso- 
ever YE ask, believe THAT YE RECEIVE." YeS, 

see that thou dost in faith make God thine own ; 
the promise will be thine, too. 

Precious lesson that Jesus has to teach us this day. 
We seek God's gifts ; God wants to give us Himself 
first. We think of prayer as the power to draw down 
good gifts from heaven ; Jesus as the means to draw 
ourselves up to God. We want to stand at the door 
and cry : Jesus would have us first enter in and real- 
ize that we are friends and children. Let us accept 
93 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the teaching. Let every experience of the littleness 
of our faith in prayer urge us first to have and exer- 
cise more faith in the Hving God, and in such faith to 
yield ourselves to Him. A heart full of God has 
power for the prayer of faith. Faith in God begets 
faith in the promise, in the promise too of an answer 
to prayer. 

Therefore, child of God, take time, take time, to 
bow before Hint^ to wait on Hint to reveal Himself. 
Take time, and let thy soul in holy awe and worship 
exercise and express its faith in the Infinite One, and 
as He imparts Himself and takes possession of thee 
the prayer of faith will crown thy faith in God. 

''Lord, teach us to pray." 



O my God ! I do believe in Thee. I believe in 
Thee as the Father, Infinite in Thy Love and Power. 
And as the Son, my Redeemer and my Life. And 
as the Holy Spirit, Comforter and Guide and 
Strength. Three-One God, I have faith in Thee. 
I know and am sure that all that Thou art Thou 
art to me, that all Thou hast promised Thou wilt 
perform. 

Lord Jesus ! increase this faith. Teach me to take 
time, and wait and worship in the Holy Presence 
until my faith takes in all there is in God for me. 
Let it see Him as the Fountain of all Life, working 
with Almighty Strength to accomplish His will on 
the world and in me. Let it see Him in His Love 
99 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

longing to meet and fulfil my desires. Let it so take 
possession of my heart and life that through faith 
God alone may dwell there. Lord Jesus, help me ! 
with my whole heart would I believe in God. Let 
faith in God each moment fill me. 

O my Blessed Saviour ! how can Thy Church glo- 
rify Thee, how can it fulfil that work of intercession 
through which Thy kindom must come, unless our 
whole life be faith in God. Blessed Lord ! speak 
Thy Word, " Have faith in God," into the depths 
of our souls. Amen. 

loo 



THIRTEENTH LESSON. 
«* Prayer and fasting ; " or, The Cure of Unbelief. 

Then came the disciples to Jesus apart^ and said^ IVhy 
could not we cast him out ? And Jesus said unto them, 
Because of your unbelief; for verily I say tinto you, -(f y^ 
have faith as a grain of mustard seed, nothing shall be 
impossible to you. Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by 
grayer and fasting. — MATT. xvii. 19-21. 

WHEN the disciples saw Jesus cast the evil spirit 
out of the epileptic whom "they could not 
cure," they asked the Master for the cause of their 
failure. He had given them ' ' power and authority 
over all devils, and to cure all disease." They had 
often exercised that power, and joyfully told how the 
devils were subject to them. And yet now, while He 
was on the Mount, they had utterly failed, That 
there had been nothing in the will of God or in the 
nature of the case to render deliverance impossible, 
had been proved ; at Christ's bidding the evil spirit 
had gone out. From their expression, "Why could 
we not ? " it is evident that they had wished and 
sought to do so ; they had probably used the Mas- 
ter's name, and called upon the evil spirit to go out. 
Their efiforts had been vain, and, in presence of the 

lOI 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

multitude, they had been put to shame. "Why 
could we not ? " 

Christ's answer was direct and plain : " Because of 
your unbelief." The cause of His success and their 
failure, was not owing to His having a special power 
to which they had no access. No ; the reason was 
not far to seek. He had so often taught them that 
there is one power, that of faith, to which, in the 
kingdom of darkness, as in the kingdom of God, 
everything must bow ; in the spiritual world failure 
has but one cause, the want of faith. Faith is the 
one condition on which all the Divine power can enter 
into man and work through him. It is the suscep- 
tibility of the unseen ; man's will yielded up to, and 
moulded by, the will of God. The power they had 
received to cast out devils, they did not hold in 
themselves as a permanent gift or possession ; the 
power was in Christ, to be received, and held, and 
used by faith alone, living faith in Himself. Had 
they been full of faith in Him as Lord and Conqueror 
in the spirit world, had they been full of faith /;/ Him 
as having given them authority to cast out in His 
name, this faith would have given them the victory. 
"Because of your unbelief" was, for all time, the 
Master's explanation and reproof of impotence and 
failure in His Church. 

But such want of faith must have a cause too. 
Well might the disciples have asked : " And why 
could we not believe ? Our faith has cast out devils 
before this ; why have we now failed in believing?" 
The Master proceeds to tell them ere they ask : 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

*' This kind goeth not out but by fasting- and prayer." 
As faith is the simplest, so it is the highest exercise 
of the spiritual life, where our spirit yields itself in 
perfect receptivity to God's Spirit, and so is strength- 
ened to its highest activity. This faith depends 
entirely upon the state of the spiritual life ; only when 
this is strong and in full health, when the Spirit of 
God has full sway in our life, is there the power of 
faith to do its mighty deeds. And therefore Jesus 
adds : " Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by fast- 
ing and prayer." The faith that can overcome such 
stubborn resistance as you have just seen in this evil 
spirit Jesus tells them, is not possible except to men 
living in very close fellowship with God, and in very 
special separation from the world in prayer and fast- 
ing. And so He teaches us two lessons in regard to 
prayer of deep importance. The one, that faith needs 
a life of prayer in which to grow and keep strong. 
The other, that prayer needs fasting for its full and 
perfect development. 

Faith needs a life of prayer for its full growth. In 
all the different parts of the spiritual life there is such 
close union, such unceasing action and re-action, 
that each may be both cause and effect. Thus it is 
with faith. There can be no true prayer without 
faith ; some measure of faith must precede prayer. 
And yet prayer is also the way to more faith ; there 
can be no higher degree of faith except through 
much prayer. This is the lesson Jesus teaches here. 
There is nothing needs so much to grow as our faith. 
"Your faith groweth exceedingly," is said of one 
103 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Church. When Jesus spoke the words, " According 
to your faith be it unto you," He announced the law 
of the kingdom, which tells us that all have not 
equal degrees of faith, that the same person has not 
always the same degree, and that the measure of 
faith must always determine the measure of power 
and of blessing. If we want to know where and how 
our faith is to grow, the Master points us to the throne 
of God. It is in prayer, in the exercise of the faith I 
have, in fellowship with the living God, that faith can 
increase. Faith can only live by feeding on what is 
Divine, on God Himself. 

It is in the adoring worship of God, the waiting on 
Him and for Him, the deep silence of soul that yields 
itself for God to reveal Himself, that the capacity for 
knowing and trusting God will be developed. It is as 
we take His word from the Blessed Book, and bring 
it to Himself, asking Him to speak it to us with His 
living loving voice, that the power will come fully to 
believe and receive the word as God's own word to 
us. It is in prayer, in living contact with God in 
living faith, that faith, the power to trust God, and in 
that trust, to accept everything He says, to accept 
every possibility He has offered to our faith, will 
become strong in us. Many Christians cannot under- 
stand what is meant by the much prayer they some- 
times hear spoken of : they can form no conception, 
nor do they feel the need, of spending hours with 
God. But what the Master says, the experience of 
His people has confirmed, men of strong faith are 
men of much prayer. 

104 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

This just brings us back again to the lesson we 
learned when Jesus, before telling us to believe that 
we receive what we ask, first said, " Have faith in 
God." It is God, the living God, into whom our 
faith must strike its roots deep and broad ; then it 
will be strong to remove mountains and cast out 
devils. " If ye have faith, nothing shall be impossible 
to you." Oh ! if we do but give ourselves up to the 
work God has for us in the world, coming into con- 
tact with the mountains and the devils there are to be 
cast away and cast out, we should soon comprehend 
the need there is of much faith, and of much prayer, 
as the soil in which alone faith can be cultivated. 
Christ Jesus is our life, the life of our faith too. It is 
His life in us that makes us strong, and makes us 
simple to believe. It is the dying to self which much 
prayer implies, in closer union to Jesus, that the 
spirit of faith will come in power. Faith needs prayer 
for its full growth. 

And prayerneeds fasting for its full growth : this is 
the second lesson. Prayer is the one hand with 
which we grasp the invisible ; fasting, the other, 
with which we let loose and cast away the visible. In 
nothing is man more closely connected with the world 
of sense than in his need of food, and his enjoyment 
gf it. It was the fruit, good for food, with which 
man was tempted and fell in Paradise. It was with 
bread to be made of stones that Jesus, when an hun- 
gered, was tempted in the wilderness, and in fasting 
that He triumphed. The body has been redeemed to 
be a temple of the Holy Spirit ; it is in body as well 
105 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

as spirit, it is very specially, Scripture says, in eating 
and drinking, we are to glorify God. It is to be 
feared that there are many Christians to whom this 
eating to the glory of God, has not yet become 
a spiritual reality. And the first thought suggested by 
Jesus' w^ords in regard to fasting and prayer, is, that 
it is only in a life of moderation and temperance and 
self-denial that there will be the heart or the strength 
to pray much. 

But then there is also its more literal meaning. 
Sorrow and anxiety cannot eat: joy celebrates its 
feasts with eating and drinking. There may come 
times of intense desire, when it is strongly felt how 
the body, with its appetites, lawful though they be, 
still hinder the spirit in its battle with the powers of 
darkness, and the need is felt of keeping it under. 
We are creatures of the senses : our mind is helped 
by what comes to us embodied in concrete form ; 
fasting helps to express, to deepen, and to confirm 
the resolution that we are ready to sacrifice anything, 
to sacrifice ourselves, to attain what we seek for the 
kingdom of God. And He who accepted the fasting 
and sacrifi.ee of the Son, knows to value and 
accept and reward with spiritual power the soul that 
is thus ready to give up all for Christ and His 
kingdom. 

And then follows a still wider application. Prayer 
is the reaching out after God and the unseen ; fasting, 
the letdng go of all that is of the seen and temporal. 
While ordinary Christians imagine that all that is not 
positively forbidden and sinful is lawful to them, and 
io6 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

seek to retain as much as possible of this world, with 
its property, its literature, its enjoyments, the truly 
consecrated soul is as the soldier who carries only 
what he needs for the warfare. Laying aside every 
weight, as well as the easily besetting sin, afraid 
of entangling himself with the affairs of this life, he 
seeks to lead a Nazarite life, as one specially set 
apart for the Lord and His service. Without such 
voluntary separation, even from what is lawful, no 
one will attain power in prayer: this kind goeth not 
out but by fasting and prayer. 

Disciples of Jesus ! who have asked the Master to 
teach you to pray, come now and accept His lessons. 
He tells you that prayer is the path to faith, strong 
faith, that can cast out devils. He tells you : " If ye 
have faith, nothing shall be impossible to you ; " let 
this glorious promise encourage you to pray much. 
Is the prize not worth the price ? Shall we not give 
up all to follow Jesus in the path He opens to us 
here ; shall we not, if need be, fast ? Shall w e not do 
anything that neither the body nor the world around 
hinder us in our great life-work, — having intercourse 
with our God in prayer, that we may become men of 
faith, whom He can use in His work of saving the 
world. 

" Lord, teach us to pray." 



O Lord Jesus ! how continually Thou hast to re- 
prove us for our unbelief ! How strange it must 
107 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

appear to Thee, this terrible incapacity of trusting our 
Father and His promises. Lord ! let Thy reproof, 
with its searching, " Because of your unbelief," sink 
into the very depths of our hearts, and reveal to us 
how much of the sin and suffering around us is our 
blame. And then teach us, Blessed Lord, that there 
is a place where faith can be learned and gained, — 
even in the prayer and fasting that brings into living 
and abiding fellowship with Thyself and the Father. 

O Saviour ! Thou Thyself art the Author and the 
Perfecter of our faith ; teach us what it is to let Thee 
live in us by Thy Holy Spirit. Lord ! our efforts and 
prayers for grace to believe have been so unavailing. 
We know why it was : we sought for strength in our- 
selves to be given from Thee. Holy Jesus! do at 
length teach us the mystery of Thy life in us, and 
how Thou, by Thy Spirit, dost undertake to live in 
us the life of faith, to see to it that our faith shall not 
fail. O let us see that our faith will just be a part of 
that wonderful pjayer-life which Thou givest in them 
who expect their training for the ministry of interces- 
sion, not in word and thought only, but in the Holy 
Unction Thou givest, the inflowing of the Spirit 
of Thine own life. And teach us how, in fasting and 
prayer, we may grow up to the faith to which nothing 
shall be impossible. Amen. 



NOTE. 



At the time when Blumhardt was passing through 
his terrible conflict with the evil spirits in those who 
io8 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

were possessed, and seeking to cast them out by- 
prayer, he often wondered what it was that hindered 
the answer. One day a friend, to whom he had 
spoken of his trouble, directed his attention to our 
Lord's words about fasting. Blumhardt resolved to 
give himself to fasting, sometimes for more than 
thirty hours. From reflection and experience he 
gained the conviction that it is of more importance 
than is generally thought. He says, "Inasmuch as 
the fasting is before God, a practical proof that the 
thing we ask is to us a matter of true and pressing in- 
terest, and inasmuch as in a high degree it strengthens 
the intensity and power of the prayer, and becomes 
the unceasing practical expression of a prayer with- 
out words, I could believe that it would not be 
without efficacy, especially as the Master's words had 
reference to a case like the present. I tried it, with- 
out telling any one, and in truth the later conflict was 
extraordinarily lightened by it. I could speak with 
much greater restfulness and decision. I did not re- 
quire to be so long present with the sick one ; and I 
felt that I could influence without being present." 
109 



FOURTEENTH LESSON. 

'♦When ye stand praying, forgive; or, Prayer 
and Love. 

And whensoever ye stand praying, forgive^ ^f y^ have 
aught against any one ; that your Father also which is in 
heaven may forgive you your trespasses. — MARK xi. 25. 

THESE words follow immediately on the great 
prayer-promise, "All things whatsoever ye 
pray, believe that ye have received them, and ye shall 
have them." We have already seen how the words 
that preceded that promise, " Have faith in God," 
taught us that in prayer all depends upon our relation 
to God being clear ; these words that follow on it 
remind us that our relation with fellow-men must be 
clear too. Love to God and love to our neighbor are 
inseparable ; the prayer from a heart, that is either 
not right with God on the one side, or with men on 
the other, cannot prevail. Faith and love are essen- 
tial to each other. 

We find that this is a thought to which our Lord 
frequently gave expression. In the Sermon on the 
Mount (Matt. v. 23, 24), when speaking of the sixth 
commandment, He taught His disciples how impos- 

IIO 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

sible acceptable worship to the Father was if every- 
thing were not right with the brother; "If thou art 
offering thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there 
thy gift before the altar, and go thy way ; first be 
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer 
thy gift." And so later, when speaking of prayer to 
God, after having taught us to pray, " Forgive us our 
debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors," He 
added at the close of the prayer : " If you forgive not 
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive 
your trespasses." At the close of the parable of the 
unmerciful servant He applies His teaching in the 
words : " So shall also my Heavenly Father do unto 
you, if ye forgive not every one his brother from 
your hearts." And so here, beside the dried-up 
fig-tree, where He speaks of the wonderful power of 
faith and the prayer of faith. He all at once, appar- 
ently without connection, introduces the thought, 
* ' Whensoever ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have 
aught against any one ; that your Father also which 
is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses." It is 
as if the Lord had learned during His life at Nazareth 
and afterwards that disobedience to the law of love to 
men was the great sin even of praying people, and 
the great cause of the feebleness of their prayer. And 
it is as if He wanted to lead us into His own blessed 
experience that nothing gives such liberty of access 
and such power in believing as the consciousness 
that we have given ourselves in love and compassion, 
for those whom God loves. 
Ill 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

The first lesson taught here is that of a forgiving 
disposition. We pray, "Forgive, even as we have 
forgiven." Scripture says, " Forgive one another, 
even as God also in Christ forgave you." God's full 
and free forgiveness is to be the rule of ours with 
men. Otherwise our reluctant, half-hearted forgive- 
ness, which is not forgiveness at all, will be God's 
rule with us. Every prayer rests upon our faith in 
God's pardoning grace. If God dealt with us after 
our sins, not one prayer could be heard. Pardon 
opens the door to all God's love and blessing; 
because God has pardoned all our sin, our prayer 
can prevail to obtain all we need. The deep sure 
ground of answer to prayer is God's forgiving love. 
When it has taken possession of the heart, we pray 
in faith. But also, when it has taken possession of 
the heart, we live in love. God's forgiving disposi- 
tion, revealed in His love to us, becomes a disposi- 
tion in us; as the power of His forgiving love shed 
abroad and dwelling within us, we forgive even as 
He forgives. If there be great and grievous injury or 
injustice done us, we seek first of all to possess a 
Godlike disposition ; to be kept from a sense of 
wounded honor, from a desire to maintain our rights, 
or from rewarding the offender as he has deserved. 
In the little annoyances of daily life, we are watchful 
not to excuse the hasty temper, the sharp word, the 
quick judgment, with the thought that we mean no 
harm, that we do not keep the anger long, or that it 
would be too much to expect from feeble human 
nature that we should really forgive the way God and 

112 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Christ do. No, we take the command Hterally, 
"■ Even as Christ forgave, so also do ye." The blood 
that cleanses the conscience from dead works, cleanses 
from selfishness too ; the love it reveals is pardoning 
love, that takes possession of us and flows through 
us to others. Our forgiving love to men is the evi- 
dence of the reality of God's forgiving love in us, and 
so the condition of the prayer of faith. 

There is a second, more general lesson ; our daily 
life in the world is made the test of our intercourse 
with God in prayer. How often the Christian, when 
he comes to pray, does his utmost to cultivate ceitaia 
frames of mind which he thinks will be pleasing. He 
does not understand, or forgets, that life does not 
consist of so many loose pieces, of which, now the 
one, then the other, can be taken up. Life is a whole, 
and the pious frame of the hour of prayer is judged of 
by God from the ordinary frame of the daily life of 
which the hour of prayer is but a small part. Not 
the feeling I call up, but the tone of my life during 
the day, is God's criterion of what I really am and 
desire. My drawing nigh to God is of one piece with 
my intercourse with men and earth ; failure here will 
cause failure there. And that not only when there 
is the distinct consciousness of anything wrong be- 
tween my neighbor and myself ; but the ordinary 
current of my thinking and judging, the unloving 
thoughts and words I allow to pass unnoticed, can 
hinder my prayer. The effectual prayer of faith comes 
out from a life given up to the will and the love of 
God. Not according to what I try to be when pray- 
8 113 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ing, but what I am when not praying, is my prayer 
dealt with by God. 

We may gather these thoughts into a third lesson : 
In our life with men the one thing on which every- 
thing depends is love. The spirit of forgiveness is 
the spirit of love. Because God is love, He forgives ; 
it is only when we are dwelling in love that we can 
forgive as God forgives. In love to the brethren we 
have the evidence of love to the Father, the ground 
of confidence before God, and the assurance that our 
prayer will be heard, (i John iv. 20; iii. 18-21, 23.) 
" Let us love in deed and truth ; hereby shall we 
assure our heart before Him. If our heart condemn 
us not, we have boldness toward God, and what- 
ever we ask, we receive of Him." Neither faith nor 
work will profit if we have not love ; it is love that 
unites with God, it is love that proves the reality of 
faith. As essential as in the word that precedes the 
great prayer-promise in Mark xi. 24, " Have faith in 
God," is this one that follows it, "Have love to 
men." The right relations to the living God above 
me, and the living men around me, are the conditions 
of effectual prayer. 

This love is of special consequence when we labor 
for such and pray for them. We sometimes give our- 
selves to work for Christ, from zeal for His cause, as 
we call it, or for our own spiritual health, without 
giving ourselves in personal self-sacrificing love for 
those whose souls we seek. No wonder that our 
faith is feeble and does not conquer. To look on 
each wretched one, however unlovable he be, in the 
114 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

light of the tender love of Jesus the Shepherd seeking 
the lost ; to see Jesus Christ in him, and to take him 
up, for Jesus' sake, in a heart that really loves, — this, 
this is the secret of beHeving prayer and successful 
effort. Jesus, in speaking of forgiveness, speaks of 
love as its root. Just as in the Sermon on the Mount 
He connected his teaching and promises about prayer 
with the call to be merciful, as the Father in heaven 
is merciful (Matt. v. 7, 9, 22, 38-48), so we see it 
here ; a loving life is the condition of believing 
prayer. 

It has been said : There is nothing so heart search- 
ing as believing prayer, or even the honest effort to 
pray in faith. O let us not turn the edge of that self- 
examination by the thought that God does not hear 
our prayer for reasons known to Himself alone. By 
no means. '* Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask 
amiss." Let that word of God search us. Let us 
ask whether our prayer be indeed the expression 
of a life wholly given over to the will of God and the 
love of man. Love is the only soil in which faith can 
strike its roots and thrive. As it throws its arms up, 
and opens its heart heavenward, the Father always 
looks to see if it has them opened towards the evil 
and the unworthy too. Li that love, not indeed the 
love of perfect attainment, but the love of fixed pur- 
pose and sincere obedience, faith can alone obtain 
the blessing. It is He who gives himself to let the 
love of God dwell in him, and in the practice of daily 
life to love as God loves, who will have the power to 
believe in the Love that hears his every prayer. It is 
115 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne ; it is 
suffering and forbearing love that prevails with God 
in prayer. The merciful shall obtain mercy ; the 
meek shall inherit the earth. 

"Lord, teach us to prav." 



Blessed Father 1 Thou art Love, and only he that 
abideth in love abideth in Thee and in fellowship 
with Thee. The Blessed Son hath this day again 
taught me how deeply true this is of my fellowship 
with Thee in prayer. O my God ! let Thy love, shed 
abroad in my heart by the Holy Spirit, be in me a 
fountain of love to all around me, that out of a life in 
love may spring the power of believing prayer. O my 
Father ! grant by the Holy Spirit that this may be my 
experience, that a life in love to all around me is the 
gate to a life in the love of my God. And give me 
especially to find in the joy with which I forgive day 
by day whoever might offend me, the proof that Thy 
forgiveness to me is a power and a life. 

Lord Jesus ! my Blessed Teacher ! teach Thou me 
to forgive and to love. Let the power of Thy blood 
make the pardon of my sins such a reality, that for- 
giveness, as shown by Thee to me, and by me to 
others, may be the very joy of heaven. Show me 
whatever in my intercourse with fellow-men might 
hinder my fellowship with God, so that my daily life 
in my own home and in society may be the school in 
which strength and confidence are gathered for the 
prayer of faith. Amen. 

ii6 



FIFTEENTH I^ESSON. 

" If two agree ; ** or, The Power of United Prayer. 

Again I say unto yoic, That if two of you shall agree on 
earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, IT SHALL 
BE DONE/i'r thetn of my Father which is in heaven. For 
where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there 
am I in the midst of them. — Matt. xviii. 19, 20. 

ONE of the first lessons of our Lord in His school 
of prayer was : Not to be seen of men. Enter 
thy inner chamber ; be alone with the Father. When 
He has thus taught us that the meaning of prayer is 
personal individual contact with God, He comes with 
a second lesson : You have need not only of secret 
solitary, but also of public united prayer. And He 
gives us a very special promise for the united prayer 
of two or three who agree in what they ask. As a 
tree has its root hidden in the ground and its stem 
growing up into the sunlight, so prayer needs equally 
for its full development the hidden secrecy in which 
the soul meets God alone, and the public fellowship 
with those who find in the name of Jesus their 
common meeting-place. 

The reason why this must be so is plain. The bond 
that unites a man to his fellow-men is no less real 
117 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

and close than that which unites him to God : he is 
one with them. Grace renews not alone our relation 
to God, but to man too. We not only learn to say 
*' My Father," but " Our Father." Notiiing would be 
more unnatural than that children of a family should 
always meet their father separately, but never in the 
united expression of their desires or their love. Be- 
lievers are not only members of one family, but even 
of one body. Just as each member of the body 
depends on the other, and the full action of the spirit 
dwelling in the body depends on the union and co- 
operation of all, so Christians cannot reach the full 
blessing God is ready to bestow through His Spirit, 
but as they seek and receive it in fellowship with 
each other. It is in the union and fellowship of be- 
lievers that the Spirit can manifest His full power. It 
was to the hundred and twenty continuing in one 
place together, and praying with one accord, that the 
Spirit came from the throne of the glorified Lord. 

The marks of true united prayer are given us in 
these words of our Lord. The first is agreement as 
to the thing asked. There must not only be generally 
the consent to agree with anything another may ask: 
there must be some special thing, matter of distinct 
united desire ; the agreement must be, as all prayer, 
in spirit and in truth. In such agreement it will 
become very clear to us what exactly we are asking, 
whether we may confidently ask according to God's 
will, and whether we are ready to believe that we 
have received what we ask. 

The second mark is the gathering in, or into, the 
ii8 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Name of Jesus. We shall afterwards have much 
more to learn of the need and the power of the Name 
of Jesus in prayer ; here our Lord teaches us that the 
Name must be the centre of union to which believers 
gather, the bond of union that makes them one, just 
as a home contains and unites all who are in it. " The 
Name of the Lord is a strong tower ; the righteous 
runneth into it and escape." That Name is such a 
reality to those who understand and believe it, that to 
meet within it is to have Himself present. The love 
and unity of His disciples have to Jesus infinite 
attraction ; " Where two or three are gathered in my 
Name, thei^e am I in the midst of them.'" It is the 
living presence of Jesus, in the fellowship of His 
loving praying disciples, that gives united prayer its 
power. 

The third mark is, the sure answer: *'It shall be 
done for them of my Father." A prayer-meeting for 
maintaining religious fellowship, or seeking our own 
edification, may have its use ; this was not the 
Saviour's view in its appointment. He meant it as a 
means of securing special answer to prayer. A prayer 
meeting without recognized answer to prayer ought 
to be an anomaly. When any of us have distinct 
desires in regard to which we feel too weak to exer- 
cise the needful faith, we ought to seek strength in 
the help of others. In the unity of faith and of love 
and of the Spirit, the power of the Name and the 
Presence of Jesus acts more freely and the answer 
comes more surely. The mark that there has been 
true united prayer is the fruit, the answer, the receiv- 
119 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ing of the thing we have asked : *' I say unto you, 
// shall be done for them of my Father which is in 
heaven." 

What an unspeakable privilege this of united 
prayer is, and what a power it might be. If the be- 
lieving husband and wife knew that they were joined 
together in the Name of Jesus to experience his 
presence and power in united prayer (i Peter) ; if 
friends believed what mighty help two or three pray- 
ing in concert could give each other ; if in every 
prayer meeting the coming together in the Name, the 
faith in the Presence, and the expectation of the 
answer, stood in the foreground ; if in every Church 
united effectual prayer were regarded as one of the 
chief purposes for which they are banded together, 
the highest exercise of their power as a Church ; if in 
the Church universal the coming of the kingdom, the 
coming of the King Himself, first in the mighty out- 
pouring of His Holy Spirit, then in His own glorious 
person, were really matter of unceasing united crying 
to God ; — O who can say what blessing might come 
to, and through, those who thus agreed to prove God 
in the fulfilment of His promise. 

In the Apostle Paul we see very distinctly what a 
reality his faith in the power of united prayer was. 
To the Romans he writes (xv. 30) : "I beseech you, 
brethren, by the love of the Spirit, that ye strive 
together with me in your prayer to God for me." He 
expects in answer to be delivered from his enemies, 
and to be prospered in his work. To the Corinthians 
(2 Cor. i. 11), " God will still deliver us, ye also help- 
120 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ing together on our behalf by your supplications; '^ 
their prayer is to have a real share in his deliverance. 
To the Ephesians he writes: "With all prayer and 
supplication praying at all seasons in the Spirit for all 
the saints and on my behalf, that utterance may be 
given unto me." His power and success in his min- 
istry he makes to depend on their prayers. With the 
Philippians (i. 19) he expects that his trials will turn 
to his salvation and the progress of the gospel 
^'through your supplications and the supply of the 
Spirit of Jesus Christ." To the Colossians (iv. 3) he 
adds to the injunction to continue steadfast in prayer: 
"Withal praying for us too, that God may open unto 
us a door for the word." And to the Thessalonians 
(2 Thess. iii. i) he writes: "Finally, brethren, pray 
for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be 
glorified, and that we may be delivered from un- 
reasonable men." It is everywhere evident that Paul 
felt himself the member of a body, on the sympathy 
and co-operation of which he was dependent, and that 
he counted on the prayers of these Churches to gain 
for him, what otherwise might not be given. The 
prayers of the Church were to him as real a factor in 
the work of the kingdom, as the power of God. 

Who can say what power a Church could develop 
and exercise, if it gave itself to the work of prayer 
day and night for the coming of the kingdom, for 
God's power on His servants and His word, for the 
glorifying of God in the salvation of souls ? Most 
Churches think their members are gathered into one 
simply to take care of and build up each other. They 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

know not that God rules the world by the prayers of 
His saints ; that prayer is the power by which Satan 
is conquered ; that by prayer the Church on earth has 
disposal of the powers of the heavenly world. They 
do not remember that Jesus has, by His promise, 
consecrated every assembly in His Name to be a gate 
of heaven, where His Presence is to be felt, and 
His Power experienced in the Father fulfilling their 
desires. 

We cannot sufficiently thank God for the blessed 
week of united prayer, with which Christendom in 
our days opens every year. As proof of our unity and 
our faith in the power of united prayer, as a training- 
school for the enlargement of our hearts to take in all 
the needs of the Church universal, as a help to united 
persevering prayer, it is of unspeakable value. But 
very specially as a stimulus to continued union in 
prayer in the smaller circles, its blessing has been 
great. And it will become even greater, as God's 
people recognize what it is, all to meet as one in the 
Name of Jesus, to have His Presence in the midst of 
a body all united in the Holy Spirit, and boldly to 
claim the promise that it shall be done of the Father 
what they agree to ask. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! who didst in Thy high-priestly 
prayer ask so earnestly for the unity of Thy people, 
teach us how Thou dost invite and urge us to this 

122 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

unity by Thy precious promise given to united prayer. 
It is when we are one in love and desire that our 
faith has Thy presence and the Father's answer. 

O Father ! we pray for Thy people, and for every 
smaller circle of those who meet together, that they 
may be one. Remove, we pray, all selfishness and 
self-interest, all narrowness of heart and estrange- 
ment, by which that unity is hindered. Cast out the 
spirit of the world and the flesh, through which Thy 
promise loses all its power. O let the thought of 
Thy presence and the Father's favor draw us all 
nearer to each other. 

Grant especially, Blessed Lord, that Thy Church 
may believe that it is by the power of united prayer 
that she can bind and loose in heaven ; that Satan 
can be cast out ; that souls can be saved ; that moun- 
tains can be removed ; that the kingdom can be 
hastened. And grant, good Lord ! that in the circle 
with which I pray, the prayer of the Church may in- 
deed be the power through which Thy Name and 
Word are glorified. Amen. 
123 



SIXTEENTH I.ESSON. 

* 'Speedily, though bearing long: " or, The Power 
of Persevering Prayer. 

And He spake a pa7-able tinto ihem to the end that they 
ought always to pray ^ and not to faint. , . . j4fid the Lord 
saidj Hear what the tinrighteous judge saiih. And shall 
not God avejtge His own elect, zvhich cry to Him day and 
nighty and He is long-suffering over ihem ? I say tinto 
you, that He will avenge them speedily. — LuKE xviii. 1-8. 

OF all the mysteries of the prayer-world, the need 
of persevering prayer is one of the greatest. 
That the Lord, who is so loving and longing to bless, 
should have to be supplicated time after time, some- 
times year after year, before the answer comes, we can- 
not easily understand. It is also one of the greatest 
practical difficulties in the exercise of believing prayer. 
When, after persevering supplication, our prayer re- 
mains unanswered, it is often easiest for our slothful 
flesh, and it has all the appearance of pious submis- 
sion, to think that we must now cease praying, be- 
cause God may have His secret reason for withhold- 
ing His answer to our request. 

It is by faith alone that the difficulty is overcome. 
When once faith has taken its stand upon God's 
124 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Word and the Name of Jesus, and has yielded itself 
to the leading of the Spirit to seek God's will and 
honor alone in its prayer, it need not be discouraged 
by delay. It knows from Scripture that the power of 
believing prayer is simply irresistible ; real faith can 
never be disappointed. It knows how, just as water, 
to exercise the irresistible power it can have, must be 
gathered up and accumulated, until the stream can 
come down in full force, there must often be a heap- 
ing up of prayer, until God sees that the measure is 
full, and the answer comes. It knows how, just as 
the ploughman has to take his ten thousand steps 
and sow his ten thousand seeds, each one a part of 
the preparation for the final harvest, so there is a 
need-be for oft-repeated persevering prayer, all work- 
ing out some desired blessing. It knows for certain 
that not a single believing prayer can fail of its effect 
in heaven, but has its influence, and is treasured up 
to work out an answer in due time to him who per- 
severeth to the end. It knows that it has to do not 
with human thoughts or possibilities, but with the 
word of the living God, And so, even as Abraham 
through so many years "in hope believed against 
hope," and then "through faith and patience inhe- 
rited the promise," it accounts that the long-suffering 
of the Lord is salvation, waiting and hasting unto 
the coming of its Lord to fulfill His promise. 

To enable us, when the answer to our prayer does 

not come at once, to combine quiet patience and 

joyful confidence in our persevering prayer, we must 

specially try to understand the two words in which 

125 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

our Lord sets forth the character and conduct, not of 
the unjust judge, but of our God and Father, towards 
those whom He allows to cry day and night to Him : 
" He is lo7ig- suffering over them ; He will avenge 
them speedily.''' 

He will avenge them speedily^ the Master says. 
The blessing is all prepared ; He is not only willing, 
but most anxious to give them what they ask ; ever- 
lasting love burns with the longing desire to reveal 
itself fully to its beloved, and to satisfy their needs. 
God will not delay one moment longer than is abso- 
lutely necessary; He will do all in His power to 
hasten and speed the answer. 

But why, if this be true and His power be infinite, 
does it often last so long with the answer to prayer? 
And why must God's own elect so often, in the 
midst of suffering and conflict, cry day and night? 
"He is long-suffering over them." "Behold! the 
husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the 
earth, being long-suffering over it, till it receive the 
early and the latter rain." The husbandman does 
indeed long for his harvest, but knows that it must 
have its full time of sunshine and rain, and has long 
patience. A child so often wants to pick the half- 
ripe fruit; the husbandman knows to wait till the 
proper time. Man, in his spiritual nature, too, is 
under the law of gradual growth that reigns in all 
created life. It is only in the path of development 
that he can reach his divine destiny. And it is the 
Father, in whose hands are the times and seasons, 
who alone knows the moment when the soul or the 
126 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Church is ripened to that fulness of faith in which it 
can really take and keep the blessing. As a father 
who longs to have his only child home from school, 
and yet waits patiently till the time of training is com- 
pleted, so it is with God and His children ; He is the 
long-suffering One and answers speedily. 

The insight into this truth leads the believer to 
cultivate the corresponding dispositions : patience and 
faith^ waiting and hasting, are the secret of his perse- 
verance. By faith in the promise of God we know 
that we have the petitions we have asked of Him. 
Faith takes and holds the answer in the promise, as 
an unseen spiritual possession, rejoices in it, and 
praises for it. But there is a difference between the 
faith that thus holds the word and knows that it has 
the answer, and the clearer, fuller, riper faith that 
obtains the promise as a present experience. It is in 
persevering, not unbelieving, but confident and prais- 
ing prayer, that the soul grows up into that full union 
with its Lord in which it can enter upon the posses- 
sion of the blessing in Him. There may be in these 
around us, there may be in that great system of being 
of which we are part, there may be in God's govern- 
ment, things that have to be put right through our 
prayer, ere the answer can fully come : the faith that 
has, according to the command, believed that it has 
received, can allow God to take His time ; it knows 
it has prevailed and must prevail. In quiet, persis- 
tent and determined perseverance it continues in 
prayer and thanksgiving until the blessing come. 
And so we see combined what at first sight appears 
127 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

so contradictory; the faith that rejoices in the answer 
of the unseen God as a present possession, with the 
patience that cries day and night until it be revealed. 
The speedily of God's long-suffering is met by the 
triumphant but patient faith of His waiting child. 

Our great danger in this school of the answer de- 
layed, is the temptation to think that, after all, it may 
not be God's will to give us what we ask. If our 
prayer be according to God's word, and under the 
leading of the Spirit, let us not give way to these 
fears. Let us learn to give God time. God needs 
time with us. If we only give Him time, that is, time 
in the daily fellowship with Himself, for Him to ex- 
ercise the full influence of His presence on us, and 
time, day by day, in the course of our being kept 
waiting, for faith to prove its reality and to fill our 
whole being, He Himself will lead us from faith to 
vision ; we shall see the glory of God, Let no delay 
shake our faith. Of faith it holds good: first the 
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. 
Each believing prayer brings a step nearer the final 
victory. Each beheving prayer helps to ripen the 
fruit and bring us nearer to it ; it fills up the measure 
of prayer and faith known to God alone ; it conquers 
the hindrances in the unseen world ; it hastens the 
end. Child of God ! give the Father time. He is 
long-suffering over you. He wants the blessing to 
be rich, and full, and sure ; give Him time, while you 
cry day and night. Only remember the word: "I 
say unto you, He will avenge them speedily." 

The blessing of such persevering prayer is un- 
128 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

speakable. There is nothing so heart-searching as 
the prayer of faith. It teaches you to discover and 
confess, and give up everything that hinders the 
coming of the blessing ; everything there may be not 
in accordance with the Father's will. It leads to 
closer fellowship with Him who alone can teach 
to pray, to a more entire surrender to draw nigh 
under no covering but that of the blood, and the 
Spirit. It calls to a closer and more simple abiding 
in Christ alone. Christian ! give God time. He will 
perfect that which concerneth you. " Long-suflfering 
— speedily," this is God's watchword as you enter 
the gates of prayer : be it yours too. 

Let it be thus whether you pray for yourself, or for 
others. All labor, bodily or mental, needs time and 
effort : we must give up ourselves to it. Nature dis- 
covers her secrets and yields her treasures only to 
diligent and thoughtful labor. However little we can 
understand it, in the spiritual husbandry it is the 
same : the seed we sow in the soil of heaven, the 
efiforts we put forth, and the influence we seek to 
exert in the world above, need our whole being : we 
must give ourselves to prayer. But let us hold fast 
the great confidence, that in due season we shall 
reap, if we faint not. 

And let us specially learn the lesson as we pray for 
the Church of Christ. She is indeed as the poor 
widow, in the absence of her Lord, apparently at the 
mercy of her adversary, helpless to obtain redress. 
Let us, when we pray for His Church or any portion 
of it, under the power of the world, asking Him to 
9 129 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

visit her with the mighty workings of His Spirit and 
to prepare her for His coming, let us pray in the 
assured faith : prayer does help, praying always and 
not fainting will bring the answer. Only give God 
time. And then keep crying day and night. "Hear 
what the unrighteous judge saith. And shall not 
God avenge His own elect, which cry to Him day 
and night, and He is long-suffering over them. I say 
unto you, He will avenge Ihem speedily.''' 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



O Lord my God ! teach me now to know Thy way, 
and in faith to apprehend what Thy Beloved Son has 
taught: "He will avenge them speedily." Let Thy 
tender love, and the delight Thou hast in hearing and 
blessing Thy children, lead me implicitly to accept 
Thy promise, that we receive what we believe, that 
we have the petitions we ask, and that the answer 
will in due time be seen. Lord ! we understand the 
seasons in nature, and know to wait with patience for 
the fruit we long for— O fill us with the assurance 
that not one moment longer than is needed wilt Thou 
delay, and that faith will hasten the answer. 

Blessed Master ! Thou hast said that it is a sign of 
God's elect that they cry day and night. O teach us 
to understand this. Thou knowest how speedily we 
grow faint and weary. It is as if the Divine Majesty 
is so much beyond the need or the reach of continued 
supplication, that it does not become us to be too im- 
130 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

portunate. O Lord ! do teach me how real the labor 
of prayer is. I know how here on earth, when I have 
failed in an undertaking, I can often succeed by 
renewed and more continuing effort, by giving more 
time and thought: show me how, by giving myself 
more entirely to prayer, to live in prayer, I shall 
obtain what I ask. And above all, O my blessed 
Teacher ! Author and Perfecter of faith, let by Thy 
grace my whole life be one of faith in the Son of God 
who loved me and gave Himself for me — in whom 
my prayer gains acceptance, in whom I have the as- 
surance of the answer, in whom the answer will be 
mine. Lord Jesus ! in this faith I will pray always 
and not faint. Amen. 



NOTE. 

The need of persevering importunate prayer ap- 
pears to some to be at variance with the faith which 
knows that it has received what it asks (Mark xi. 24). 
One of the mysteries of the Divine life is the harmony 
between the gradual and the sudden, immediate full 
possession, and slow imperfect appropriation. And 
so here persevering prayer appears to be the school 
in which the soul is strengthened for the boldness of 
faith. And with the diversity of operations of the 
Spirit there may be some in whom faith takes more 
the form of persistent waiting ; while to others, tri- 
umphant thanksgiving appears the only proper ex- 
pression of the assurance of having been heard. 

In a very remarkable way the need of persevering 
131 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

prayer, and the gradual rising into greater ease in ob- 
taining answer, is illustrated in the life of Blumhardt. 
Complaints had been lodged against him of neglect- 
ing his work as a minister of the gospel, and devoting 
himself to the healing of the sick ; and especially his 
unauthorized healing of the sick belonging to other 
congregations. In his defence he writes : "I simply 
ventured to do what becomes one who has the charge 
of souls, and to pray according to the command of 
the Lord in James i. 6, 7. In no way did I trust to my 
own power, or imagine that I had any gift that others 
had not. But this is true, I set myself to the work as 
a minister of the gospel, who has a right to pray. But 
I speedily discovered that the gates of heaven were 
not fully opened to me. Often I was inclined to retire 
in despair. But the sight of the sick ones, who could 
find help nowhere, gave me no rest. I thought of the 
word of the Lord : ' Ask, and it shall be given you ' 
(Luke xi. 9, 10). And farther, I thought that if the 
Church and her ministers had, through unblief, sloth, 
and disobedience, lost what was needed for the over- 
coming of the power of Satan, it was just for such 
times of leanness and famine that the Lord had 
spoken the parable of the friend at midnight and his 
three loaves. I felt that I was not worthy thus at 
midnight, in a time of great darkness, to appear before 
God as His friend, and ask for a member of my con- 
gregation what he needed. And yet, to leave him 
uncared for, I could not either. And so I kept 
knocking, as the parable directs, or, as some have 
said, with great presumption and tempting God. Be 
132 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

this as it may, I could not leave my guest unprovided. 
At this time the parable of the widow became very 
precious to me. I saw that the Church was the widow, 
and I was a minister of the Church. I had the right 
to be her mouthpiece against the adversary ; but for 
a long time the Lord would not. I asked nothing 
more than the three loaves ; what I needed for my 
guest. At last the Lord listened to the importunate 
beggar, and helped me. Was it wrong of me to pray 
thus ? The two parables must surely be applicable 
somewhere, and where was greater need to be con- 
ceived ? 

' ' And what was the fruit of my prayer ? The friend 
who was at first unwilling, did not say, Go now, I will 
myself give to your friend what he needs ; I do not 
require you ; but gave it to me as His friend, to give 
to my gHest. And so I used the three loaves and had 
to spare. But the supply was small, and new guests 
came ; because they saw I had a heart to help them, 
and that I would take the trouble even at midnight to 
go to my friend. When I asked for them, too, I got 
the needful again, and there was again to spare. How 
could I help that the needy continually came to my 
house? Was I to harden myself, and say, Why do 
you come to me ? there are larger and better homes 
in the city, go there. Their answer was, Dear sir, we 
cannot go there. We have been there : they were 
very sorry to send us away so hungry, but they could 
not undertake to go and ask a friend for what we 
wanted. Do go, and get us bread, for we suffer great 
pain. What could I do ? They spoke the truth, and 
^33 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

their suffering touched my heart. However much 
labor it cost me, I went each time again, and got the 
three loaves. Often I got what I asked much quicker 
than at first, and also much more abundantly. But 
all did not care for this bread, and so some left my 
home hungry." ^ 

In his first struggles with the evil spirits, it took 
him more than eighteen months of much prayer and 
labor before the final victory was gained. Afterwards 
he had such ease of access to the throne, and stood 
in such close communication with the unseen world, 
that often, when letters came asking prayer for sick 
people, he could, after just looking upward for a 
single moment, obtain the answer as to whether they 
would be healed. 

1 From Johann Christopke Blumhardt. Ein Lebensbild von F. 
Zundel. 



SEVENTEENTH I.ESSON. 

** I know that Thou hearest me always ; *' or 
Prayer in harmony with the being of God. 

Father^ I thank Thee that Thou heardesi me. And I 
knew that Thou hearest ifie always. — JoHN xi. 41, 42. 

Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee. Ask 
ofme^ and I shall give Thee. — Ps. ii. 7, 8. 

IN the New Testament we find a distinction made 
between faith and knowledge. "To one is given, 
through the Spirit, the word of wisdom ; to another 
the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit ; 
to another faith, in the same Spirit." In a child or a 
simple-minded Christian there may be much faith 
with little knowledge. Childlike simplicity accepts 
the truth without difficulty, and often cares little to 
give itself or others any reason for its faith but this : 
God has said. But it is the will of God that we should 
love and serve Him, not only with all the heart, but 
also with all the mind ; that we should grow up into 
an insight into the Divine wisdom and beauty of all 
His ways and words and works. It is only thus that 
the believer will be able fully to approach and rightly 
to adore the glory of God's grace; and only thus 
that our heart can intelligently apprehend the trea- 
135 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

sures of wisdom and knowledge there are in redemp- 
tion, and be prepared to enter fully into the highest 
note of the song that rises before the throne : * ' O 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge af God ! ' ' 

In our prayer-life this truth has its full application. 
While prayer and faith are so simple that the new- 
born convert can pray with power, true Christian 
science finds in the doctrine of prayer some of its 
deepest problems. In how far is the power of prayer 
a reality ? If so, how God can grant to prayer such 
mighty power? How can the action of prayer be 
harmonized with the will and the decrees of God? 
How can God's sovereignty and our will, God's lib- 
erty and ours, be reconciled ? — these and other like 
questions are fit subjects for Christian meditation and 
inquiry. The more earnestly and reverently w^e ap- 
proach such mysteries, the more shall we in adoring 
wonder fall down to praise Him who hath in prayer 
given such power to man. 

One of the secret difficulties with regard to prayer, 
— one which, though not expressed, does often really 
hinder prayer, — is derived from the perfection of 
God, in His absolute independence of all that is out- 
side of Himself. Is He not the Infinite Being, who 
owes what He is to Himself alone, who determines 
Himself, and whose wise and holy will has deter- 
mined all that is to be ? How can prayer influence 
Him, or He be moved by prayer to do what other- 
wise would not be done ? Is not the promise of an 
answer to prayer simply a condescension to our weak- 
136 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ness ? Is what is said of the power — the much-avail- 
ing power — of prayer anything more than an accom- 
modation to our mode of thought, because the Deity 
never can be dependent on any action from without 
for its doings ? And is not the blessing of prayer 
simply the influence it exercises upon ourselves ? 

In seeking an answer to such questions, we find 
the key in the very being of God, in the mystery of 
the Holy Trinity. If God was only one Person, shut 
up within Himself, there could be no thought of 
nearness to Him or influence on Him. But in God 
there are three Persons. In God we have Father and 
Son, who have in the Holy Spirit their living bond of 
unity and fellowship. When eternal Love begat the 
Son, and the Father gave the Son as the Second Per- 
son, a place next Himself as His Equal and His 
Counsellor, there was a way opened for prayer and 
its influence in the very inmost life of Deity itself. 
Just as on earth, so in heaven the whole relation 
between Father and Son is that of giving and taking. 
And if that taking is to be as voluntary and self- 
determined as the giving, there must be on the part 
of the Son an asking and receiving. In the holy fel- 
lowship of the Divine Persons, this asking of the Son 
was one of the great operations of the Thrice Blessed 
Life of God. Hence we have in Psalm ii : ♦' This day 
I have begotten Thee : ask of me and I will give 
Thee." The Father gave the Son the place and the 
power to act upon Him. The asking of the Son was 
no mere show or shadow, but one of those life-move- 
ments in which the love of the Father and the Son 
137 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

met and completed each other. The Father had de- 
termined that He should not be alone in His coun- 
sels; there was a Son on whose asking and accepting 
their fulfilment should depend. And so there was in 
the very Being and Life of God an asking of which 
prayer on earth was to be the reflection and the out- 
flow. It was not without including this that Jesus 
said, *' I knew that Thou always hearest me." Just 
as the Sonship of Jesus on earth may not be separated 
from His Sonship in heaven, even so with His prayer 
on earth, it is the continuation and the counterpart of 
His asking in heaven. The prayer of the man Christ 
Jesus is the link between the eternal asking of the 
only-begotten Son in the bosom of the Father and 
the prayer of men upon earth. Prayer has its rise and 
its deepest source in the very Being of God. In the 
bosom of Deity nothing is ever done without prayer 
— the asking of the Son and the giving of the Father.* 
This may help us somewhat to understand how the 
prayer of man, coming through the Son, can have 
effect upon God. The decrees of God are not deci- 
sions made by Him without reference to the Son, or 
His petition, or the petition to be sent up through 
Him. By no means. The Lord Jesus is the first- 
begotten, the Head and Heir of all things : all things 
were created through Hint and imto Him, and all 
things consist in Him. In the counsels of the Father, 
the Son, as Representative of all creation, had always 
a voice ; in the decrees of the eternal purpose there 
was always room left for the liberty of the Son as 

1 See this thought developed in R L,ober, Die Lehre vom Gebet. 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Mediator and Intercessor, and so for the petitions of 
all who draw nigh to the Father in the Son. 

And if the thought come that this liberty and power 
of the Son to act upon the Father is at variance with 
the immutability of the Divine decrees, let us not for- 
get that there is not with God as with man, a past by 
which He is irrevocably bound. God does not live 
in time with its past and future ; the distinctions of 
time have no reference to Him who inhabits Eter- 
nity. And Eternity is an ever-present Now, in which 
the past is never past, and the future always present. 
To meet our human weakness, Scripture must speak 
of past decrees, and a coming future. In reality, the 
immutability of God's counsel is ever still in perfect 
harmony with His liberty to do whatsoever He will. 
Not so were the prayers of the Son and His people 
taken up into the eternal decrees that their effect 
should only be an apparent one; but so, that the 
Father-heart holds itself open and free to listen to 
every prayer that rises through the Son, and that 
God does indeed allow Himself to be decided by 
prayer to do what He otherwise would not have 
done. 

This perfect harmony and union of Divine Sover- 
eignty and human liberty is to us an unfathomable 
mystery, because God as the Eternal One tran- 
scends all our thoughts. But let it be our comfort 
and strength to be assured that in the eternal fellow- 
ship of the Father and the Son, the power of prayer 
has its origin and certainty, and that through our 
union with the Son, our prayer is taken up and can 
139 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

have its influence in the inner life of the Blessed 
Trinity. God's decrees are no iron framework 
against which man's liberty would vainly seek to 
struggle. No. God Himself is the Living Love, who 
in His Son as man has entered into the tenderest 
relation with all that is human, who through the Holy 
Spirit takes up all that is human into the Divine life 
of love, and keeps Himself free to give every human 
prayer its place in His government of the world. 

It is in the daybreak light of such thoughts that the 
doctrine of the Blessed Trinity no longer is an ab- 
stract speculation, but the living manifestation of the 
way in which it were possible for man to be taken up 
into the fellowship of God, and his prayer to become 
a real factor in God's rule of this earth. And we can, 
as in the distance, catch glimpses of the light that 
from the eternal world shines out on words such as 
these: "Through Him we have access by one 
Spirit unto the Father." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Everlasting God ! the Three-One and Thrice Holy! 
in deep reverence would I with veiled face worship 
before the holy mystery of Thy Divine Being. And 
if it please Thee, O most glorious God, to unveil 
aught of that mystery, I would bow with fear and 
trembling, lest I sin against Thee, as I meditate on 
Thy glory. 

Father ! I thank Thee that Thou bearest this name 
not only as the Father of Thy children here on earth, 
140 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

but as having from eternity subsisted as the Father 
with Thine only-begotten Son. I thank Thee that as 
Father Thou canst hear our prayer, because Thou hast 
from eternity given a place in Thy counsels to the ask- 
ing of Thy Son. I thank Thee that we have seen in 
Him on earth, what the blessed intercourse was He had 
with Thee in Heaven ; and how from eternity in all 
Thy counsels and decrees there had been room left 
for His prayers and their answers. And I thank Thee 
above all that through His true human nature on 
Thy throne above, and through Thy Holy Spirit in 
our human nature here below, a way has been opened 
up by which every human cry of need can be taken 
up into and touch the Life and the Love of God, and 
receive in answer whatsoever it shall ask. 

Blessed Jesus ! in whom as the Son the path of 
prayer has been opened up, and who givest us assu- 
rance of the answer, we beseech Thee, teach Thy 
people to pray. O let this each day be the sign of 
our sonship, that, like Thee, we know that the Father 
heareth us always. Amen. 



NOTE. 

*' God hears prayer.^' This simplest view of 
prayer is taken throughout Scripture. It dwells not 
on the reflex influence of prayer on our heart and 
Hfe, although it abundantly shows the connection be- 
tween prayer as an act, and prayer as a state. It 
rather fixes with great definiteness the objective or 
real purposes of prayer, to obtain blessing, gifts, 
141 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

deUverances from God. * Ask and it shall be given,' 
Jesus says. 

" However true and valuable the reflection may be, 
that God, foreseeing and foreordaining all things, has 
also foreseen and foreordained our prayers as links 
in the chain of events, of cause and effect, as a real 
power; yet we feel convinced that this is not the light 
in which the mind can find peace in this great sub- 
ject, nor do we think that here is the attractive power 
to draw us in prayer. We feel rather that such a 
reflection diverts the attention from the Object 
whence come the impulse, life and strength of prayer. 
The living God, cotemporary and not merely eternal,^ 
the living, merciful Holy One, God manifesting 
Himself to the soul, God saying, " Seek my face ; " 
this is the magnet that draws us, this alone can open 
heart and lips. . . . 

" In Jesus Christ the Son of God we have the full 
solution of the difficulty. He prayed on earth, and 
that not merely as man, but as the Son of God incar- 
nate. His prayer on earth is only the manifestation 
of His prayer from all eternity, when in the Divine 
counsel He was set up as the Christ. . . . The Son 
was appointed to be heir of all things. From all 
eternity the Son of God was the Way, the Mediator. 
He was, to use our imperfect language, from eternity 
speaking unto the Father on behalf of the world." — 
Saphir, The Hidden Life, cliap. vi. See also The 
Lord's Prayer, p. 12. 

1 Should it not rather be cotemporary, because eternal, in'the 
proper meauing of this latter word ? 
142 



EIGHTEENTH LESSON. 

*« Whose is this image? *' or, Prayer in harmony 
with the Destiny of Man. 

He saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscrip' 
Hon ? — Matt. xxii. 20. 

Ajtd God saidj Let us make man in our image ^ after our 
likeness. — Gen. i. 26. 

^ ^ \ 1 rHOSE is this image ? " It was by this ques- 
VV tioii that Jesus foiled his enemies when 
they thought to take Him, and settled the matter of 
duty in regard to the tribute. The question and the 
principle it involves are of universal application. 
Nowhere more truly than in man himself. The 
image he bears decides his destiny. Bearing God's 
image, he belongs to God ; prayer to God is what 
he was created for. Prayer is part of the wondrous 
likeness he bears to his Divine original ; of the deep 
mystery of the fellowship of love in which the Three- 
One has His blessedness, prayer is the earthly image 
and likeness. 

The more we meditate on what prayer is, and the 
wonderful power with God which it has, the more 
we feel constrained to ask who and what man is, 
that such a place in God's counsels should have been 
allotted to him. Sin has so degraded him, that from 
143 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

what he is now, we can form no conception of what 
he was meant to be. We must turn back to God's 
own record of man's creation to discover there what 
God's purpose was, and what the capacities with 
which man was endowed for the fulfilment of that 
purpose. 

Man's destiny appears clearly from God's language 
at creation. It was to fill, to subdue, to have domin- 
ion over the earth and all in it. All the three ex- 
pressions show us that man was meant, as God's 
representative, to hold rule here on earth. As God's 
viceroy he was to fill God's place: himself subject to 
God, he was to keep all else in subjection to Him. 
It was the will of God that all that was to be done 
on earth should be done through him : the history of 
the earth was to be entirely in his hands. 

In accordance with such a destiny was the position 
he was to occupy, and the power at his disposal. 
When an earthly sovereign sends a viceroy to a dis- 
tant province, it is understood that he advises as to 
the policy to be adopted, and that that advice is 
acted on : that he is at liberty to apply for troops 
and the other means needed for carrying out the 
policy or maintaining the dignity of the empire. If 
his policy be not approved of, he is recalled to make 
room for some one who better understands his sove- 
reign's desires ; as long as he is trusted, his advice 
is carried out. As God's representative, man was to 
have ruled ; all was to have been done under his 
will and rule ; on his advice and at his request 
heaven was to have bestowed its blessing on 
144 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

earth. His praj-er was to have been the wonderful, 
though simple and most natural channel, in which 
the intercourse between the King in heaven and His 
faithful servant man, as lord of this world, was to 
have been maintained. The destinies of the world 
were given into the power of the wishes, the will, the 
prayer of man. 

With sin all this underwent a terrible change: 
man's fall brought all creation under the curse. With 
redemption the beginning was seen of a glorious 
restoration. No sooner had God begun in Abraham 
to form for Himself a people from whom kings, yea, 
the Great King, should come forth, than we see what 
power the prayer of God's faithful servant has to de- 
cide the destinies of those who come in contact with 
him. In Abraham we see how prayer is not only, or 
even chiefly, the means of obtaining blessing for our- 
selves, but is the exercise of His royal prerogative to 
influence the destinies of men, and the will of God 
which rules them. We do not once find Abraham 
praying for himself His prayer for Sodom and Lot, 
for Abimelech, for Ishmael, prove what power a man 
who is God's friend has to make the history of those 
around him. 

This had been man's destiny from the first. Scrip- 
ture not only tells us this, but also teaches us how it 
was that God could entrust man with such a high 
calling. It was because he had created him in his 
own iynage and likeness. The external rule was not 
committed to him without the inner fitness : the 
bearing God's image in having dominion, in being 
lo 145 



With Christ in the School cf Prayer. 

lord of all, had its root in the inner likeness, in his 
nature. There was an inner agreement and harmony 
between God and man, an incipient Godlikeness, 
which gave man a real fitness for being the mediator 
between God and His world, for he was to be pro- 
phet, priest and king, to interpret God's will, to 
represent nature's needs, to receive and dispense 
God's bounty. It was in bearing God's image that 
he could bear God's rule; he was indeed so like 
God, so capable of entering into God's purposes, and 
carrying out His plans, that God could trust him with 
the wonderful privilege of asking and obtaining what 
the world might need. And although sin has for a 
time frustrated God's plans, prayer still remains what 
it would have been if man had never fallen : the 
proof of man's Godlikeness, the vehicle of his inter- 
course with the Infinite Unseen One, the power that 
is allowed to hold the hand that holds the destinies 
of the universe. Prayer is not merely the cry of the 
suppliant for mercy ; it is the highest forth-putting of 
his will by man, knowing himself to be of Divine 
origin, created for and capable of being, in kinglike 
liberty, the executor of the counsels of the Eternal. 

What sin destroyed, grace has restored. What the 
first Adam lost, the second has won back. In Christ 
man regains his original position, and the Church, 
abiding in Christ, inherits the promise: "Ask what 
ye will, and it shall be done unto you." Such a 
promise does by no means, in the first place, refer to 
the grace or blessing we need for ourselves. It has 
reference to our position as the fruit-bearing branches 
146 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of the Heavenly Vine, who, like Him, only live for 
the work and glory of the Father. It is for those who 
abide in Him, who have forsaken self to take up 
their abode in Him with His life of obedience and 
self-sacrifice, who have lost their life and found it in 
Him, who are now entirely given up to the interests 
of the Father and His kingdom. These are they who 
understand how their new creation has brought them 
back to their original destiny, has restored God's 
image and likeness, and with it the power to have 
dominion. Such have indeed the power, each in 
their own circle, to obtain and dispense the powers of 
heaven here on earth. With holy boldness they may 
make known what they will : they live as priests in 
God's presence ; as kings the powers of the world to 
come begin to be at their disposal.^ They enter upon 
the fulfilment of the promise: "Ask whatsoever ye 
will, it shall be done unto you." 

Church of the living God ! thy calling is higher and 

1 " God is seeking priests among the sons of men. A human 
priesthood is one of the essential parts of His eternal plan. To 
rule creation by man is His design ; to carry on the worship of 
creation by man is no less part of His design. 

" Priesthood is the appointed link between heaven and earth, 
the channel of intercourse between the sinner and God. Such 
a priesthood, in so far as expiation is concerned, is in the hands 
of the Son of God alone ; in so far as it is to be the medium of 
communication between Creator and creature, is also in the 
hands of redeemed men — of the Church of God. 

"God is seeking kings. Not out of the ranks of angels. 
Fallen man must furnish Him with the rulers of His universe. 
Human hands must wield the sceptre, human heads must wear 
the crown."— 7",%^ Rent Veil, by Dr. H. Bonar. 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

holier than thou knowest. Through thy members, as 
kings and priests unto God, would God rule the 
world ; their prayers bestow and withhold the bless- 
ings of heaven. In His elect who are not just content 
to be themselves saved, but yield themselves wholly, 
that through them, even as through the Son, the 
Father may fulfil all His glorious counsel, in these 
His elect, who cry day and night unto Him, God 
would prove how wonderful man's original destiny 
was. As the image-bearer of God on earth, the earth 
was indeed given into his hand. When he fell, all 
fell with him : the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together. But now he is redeemed ; 
the restoration of the original dignity has begun. It 
is in very deed God's purpose that the fulfilment of 
His eternal purpose, and the coming of His kingdom, 
should depend on those of His people who, abiding 
in Christ, are ready to take up their position in Him 
their Head, the great Priest-King, and in their 
prayers are bold enough to say what they will that 
their God should do. As image-bearer and repre- 
sentative of God on earth, redeemed man has by his 
prayers to determine the history of this earth. Man 
was created, and has now again been redeemed, to 
pray, and by his prayer to have dominion. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Lord ! what is man, that Thou art mindful of him? 
and the son of man, that thou visitest him ? for Thou 
has made him a little lower than the angels, and hast 
■ 148 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

crowned him with glory and honor. Thou madest 
him to have dominion over the work of Thy hands : 
Thou hast put all things under his feet. O Lord our 
Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth ! 

Lord God ! how low has sin made man to sink. 
And how terribly has it darkened his mind, that he 
does not even know his Divine destiny, to be Thy 
servant and representative. Alas ! that even Thy 
people, when their eyes are opened, are so little 
ready to accept their calling and to seek to have 
power with God, that they may have power with men 
too to bless them. 

Lord Jesus ! it is in Thee the Father hath again 
crowned man with glory and honor, and opened the 
way for us to be what He would have us. O Lord, 
have mercy on Thy people, and visit Thine heritage ! 
Work mightily in Thy Church, and teach Thy believ- 
ing disciples to go forth in their royal priesthood, and 
in the power of prayer, to which Thou hast given 
such wonderful promises, to serve Thy kingdom, to 
have rule over the nations, and make the name of 
God glorious in the earth. Amen. 
149 



NINETEENTH LESSON. 

♦* I go unto the Father I " or, Power for Praying 
and Working. 

Verily, verily^ I say unto you, He that believeth on vie, 
the works that I do shall he do also ; and GREATER WORKS 
than these shall he do ; because I go unto my Father. And 
WHATSOEVER YE SHALL ASK in my Na?ne, that -will I 
do. — John xiv. 12, 13. 

AS the Saviour opened His public ministry with 
His disciples by the Sermon on the Mount, so 
He closes it by the Parting Address preserved to us 
by John. In both He speaks more than once of 
prayer. But with a difference. In the Sermon on 
the Mount it is as to disciples who have only just 
entered His school, who scarcely know that God is 
their Father, and whose prayer chiefly has reference 
to their personal needs. In His closing address He 
speaks to disciples whose training time is now come 
to an end, and who are ready as His messengers to 
take His place and His work. In the former the 
chief lesson is : Be childlike, pray believingly, and 
trust the Father that He will give you all good gifts. 
Here He points to something higher: They are now 
His friends to whom He has made known all that He 
has heard of the Father ; His messengers, who have 
entered into His plans, and into whose hands the care 
of His work and kingdom on earth is to be entrusted. 
150 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

THey are now to go out and do His works, and, in 
the power of His approaching exaltation, even 
greater works: prayer is now to be the channel 
through which that power is to be received for their 
work. With Christ's ascension to the Father a new 
epoch commences for their working and praying both. 

See how clearly this connection comes out in our 
text. As His body here on earth, as those who are 
one with Him in heaven, they are now to do greater 
works than He had done ; their success and their 
victories are to be greater than His. He mentions 
two reasons for this. The one, because He was to go 
to the Father, to receive all power ; the other, because 
they might now ask and expect all in His Name. 
"Because I go to the Father, «;/^— notice this and — 
and, whatever ye shall ask, I will do." His going to 
the Father would thus bring the double blessing : 
they would ask and receive all in His Name, and as a 
consequence, would do the greater works. This first 
mention of prayer in our Saviour's parting words 
thus teaches us two most important lessons. He 
that would do the works of Jesus must pray in His 
Name. He that would pray in His Name tnust work 
in His Name. 

He who would work nmst pray : it is in prayer that 
the power for work is obtained. He that in faith 
would do the works that Jesus did, must pray in His 
Name. As long as Jesus was here on earth, He Him- 
self did the greatest works : devils the disciples 
could not cast out, fled at His word. When He went 
to the Father, He was no longer here in the body tQ 
151 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

work directly. The disciples were now His body : all 
His work from the throne in heaven here on earth 
must and could be done through them. One might 
have thought that now He was leaving the scene 
Himself, and could only work through commissioners, 
the works might be fewer and weaker. He assures 
us of the contrary: ^^ Verily ^ verily, I say unto you, 
He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he 
do also, and he shall do greater works. " His ap- 
proaching death was to be such a real breaking down 
and making an end of the power of sin ; with the 
resurrection the powers of the Eternal Life were so 
truly to take possession of the human body and to 
obtain supremacy over human life ; with His ascen- 
sion He was to receive the power to communicate the 
Holy Spirit so fully to His own ; the union, the one- 
ness between Himself on the throne and them on 
earth, was to be so intensely and divinely perfect, that 
He meant it as the literal truth : " Greater works 
than these shall he do, because I go to the Father." 
And the issue proved how true it was. While Jesus, 
during three years of personal labor on earth, gathered 
little more than five hundred disciples, and the most 
of them so feeble that they were but little credit to 
His cause, it was given to men like Peter and Paul 
manifestly to do greater things than He had done. 
From the throne He could do through them what He 
Himself in His humiliation could not yet do. 

But there is one condition : " He that believeth on 
me, he • shall do greater works, because I go to the 
Father ; and whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, 
152 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

that will I do.'' His going to the Father would give 
Him a new power to hear prayer. For the doing of 
the greater works, two things were needed : His 
going to the Father to receive all power, our prayer 
in His Name to receive all power from Him again. 
As He asks the Father, He receives and bestows on 
us the power of the new dispensation for the greater 
works ; as we believe, and ask in His Name, the 
power comes and takes possession of us to do the 
greater works. 

Alas ! how much working there is in the work of 
God, in which there is little or nothing to be seen of 
the power to do anything like Christ's works, not to 
speak of greater works. There can be but one rea- 
son : the believing on Him, the believing prayer in 
His Name, this is so much wanting. O that every 
laborer and leader in church, or school, in the work 
of home philanthropy or foreign missions, might 
learn the lesson : Prayer in the name of Jesus is the 
way to share in the mighty power which Jesus has 
received of the Father for His people, and it is in this 
power alone that he that believeth can do the greater 
works. To every complaint as to weakness or unfit- 
ness, as to difficulties or want of success, Jesus gives 
this one answer : " He that believeth on me shall do 
greater works, because I go to the Father, and what- 
soever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do'' We 
must understand that the first and chief thing for 
every one who would do the work of Jesus, is to 
believe and so to get linked to Him, the Almighty 
One, and then to pray the prayer of faith in His 
153 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Name. Without this our work is but human and 
carnal ; it may have some use in restraining sin, or 
preparing the way for blessing, but the real power is 
wanting. Effectual working needs first effectual 
prayer. 

And now the second lesson : He who would pray 
7nust work. It is for power to work that prayer has 
such great promises ; it is in working that the power 
for the effectual prayer of faith will be gained. In 
these parting words of our blessed Lord we find that 
He no less than six times (John xiv. 13, 14; xv. 7, 
16 ; xvi. 23, 24) repeats those unlimited prayer-prom- 
ises which have so often awakened our anxious ques- 
tionings as to their real meaning: '■' whatsoeve7\^'' 
'' anythmg,'' '' what ye will,'' ^^ ask and ye shall 
receive y How many a believer has read these over 
with joy and hope, and in deep earnestness of soul 
has sought to plead them for his own need. And he 
has come out disappointed. The simple reason was 
this : he had rent away the promise from its surround- 
ing. The Lord gave the wonderful promise of the 
free use of His Name with the Father in connection 
with the doi)ig of His works. It is the disciple who 
gives himself wholly to live for Jesus' work and king- 
dom, for His will and honor, to whom the power 
will come to appropriate the promise. He that would 
fain grasp the promise when he wants something very 
special for himself, will be disappointed, because he 
would make Jesus the servant of his own comfort. 
But to him who seeks to pray the effectual prayer of 
faith, because he needs it for the work of the Master, 
154 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

to fiim it will be given to learn it ; because he has 
made himself the servant of his Lord's interests. 
Prayer not only teaches and strengthens to work ; 
work teaches and strengtiiens to pray. 

This is in perfect harmony with what holds good 
both in the natural and the spiritual world. Whoso- 
ever hath, to him shall be given ; or, he that is faith- 
ful in a little, is faithful also in much. Let us with the 
small measure of grace already received, give our- 
selves to the Master for His work ; work will be to 
us a real school of prayer. It was when Moses had 
to take full charge of a rebellious people that he felt 
the need, but also the courage, to speak boldly to 
God and to ask great things of Him (Ex. xxxiii. 12, 
15, ]8). As you give yourself entirely to God for His 
work, you will feel that nothing less than these great 
promises are what you need, that nothing less is what 
you may most confidently expect. 

Believer in Jesus ! you are called, you are ap- 
pointed, to do the works of Jesus, and even greater 
works, because He has gone to the Father to receive 
the power to do them in and through you. 

Whatsoever ^^ shall ask in my Name that will I do. 
Give yourself, and live, to do the works of Christ, 
and you will learn to pray so as to obtain wonderful 
answers to prayer. Give yourself and live, to pray, 
and you will learn to do the works He did, and 
greater works, < With disciples full of faith in Him- 
self, and bold in prayer to ask great things, Christ 
can conquer the world. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 
155 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

O my Lord ! I liave this day again heard words 
from Thee which pass my comprehension. And yet 
I cannot do aught but in simple childlike faith take 
and keep them as Thy gift to me too. Thou hast 
said that in virtue of Thy going to the Father, he 
that believeth on Thee will do the works which 
Thou hast done, and greater works. Lord ! I wor- 
ship Thee as the Glorified One, and look for the ful- 
filment of Thy promise. May my whole life just be 
one of continued believing in Thee. So purify and 
sanctify my heart, make it so tenderly susceptible of 
Thyself and Thy love, that believing on Thee may 
be the very life it breathes. 

And Thou hast said that in virtue of Thy going to 
the Father, whatsoever we ask. Thou wilt do. From 
Thy throne of power Thou wouldest make Thy peo- 
ple share the power given Thee, and work through 
them as the members of Thy body, in response to 
their believing prayers in Thy Name. Power in 
prayer with Thee, and power in work with men, is 
what Thou hast promised Thy people and me too. 

Blessed Lord ! forgive us all that we have so little 
believed Thee and Thy promise, and so little proved 
Thy faithfulness in fulfilling it. O forgive us that we 
have so little honored Thy all-prevailing Name in 
heaven or upon earth. Lord ! teach me to pray so 
that I may prove that Thy Name is indeed all-pre- 
vailing with God and men and devils. Yea, teach 
me so to work and so to pray that Thou canst glorify 
Thyself in me as the Omnipotent One, and do Thy 
great works through me too. Amen. 
156 



TWENTIETH LESSON. 

"That the Father may be glorified;" or, The 
Chief End of Prayer. 

I go unto the Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in 
my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified 
in the Son. — JoHN xiv. 13. 

nrHA T the Father may be glorified in the Son ; it 
■^ is to this end that Jesus on His throne in glory 
will do all we ask in His Name. Every answer to 
prayer He gives will have this as its object : when 
there is no prospect of this object being obtained, 
He will not answer. It follows as a matter of course 
that this must be with us, as with Jesus, the essential 
element in our petitions : the glory of the Father must 
be the aim and end, the very soul and life of our 
prayer. 

It w^as so with Jesus when He was on earth. "I 
seek not mine own honor : I seek the honor of Him 
that sent me ; " in such words we have the keynote 
of His life. In the first words of the high-priestly 
prayer He gives utterance to it : " Father, glorify 
Thy Son, that Thy Son may glorify Thee.^' "■ I have 
glorified Thee on earth; glorify me with Thyself." 
The ground on which he asks to be taken up into 
157 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the glory He had with the Father, is the twofold one : 
He has glorified Him on earth; He will still glorify 
Him in heaven. What He asks is only to enable Him 
to glorify the Father more. It is as we enter into 
sympathy with Jesus on this point, and gratify Him 
by making the Father's glory our chief object in 
prayer too, that our prayer cannot fail of an answer. 
There is nothing of which the Beloved Son has said 
more distinctly that it will glorify the Father than 
this, His doing what we ask ; He will not, therefore, 
let any opportunity slip of securing this object. Let 
us make His aim ours : let the glory of the Father be 
the link between our asking and His doing : such 
prayer must prevail.^ 

This word of Jesus comes indeed as a sharp two- 
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of sou 
and spirit, and quick to discern the thoughts and 
intents of the heart. Jesus in His prayers on earth, 
in His intercession in heaven, in His promise of an 
answer to our prayers from there, makes this His first 
object — the glory of His Father. Is it so with us 
too ? Or are not, in large measure, self-interest and 
self-will the strongest motives urging us to pray ? Or, 
if we cannot see that this is the case, have we not to 
acknowledge that the distinct, conscious longing for 
the glory of the Father is not what animates our 
prayers ? And yet it must be so. 

Not as if the believer does not at times desire it. 
But he has to mourn that he has so little attained. 

^ See in the note on George Muller, at the close of this volume, 
how he was led to make God's glory his first object. 
158 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

And he knows the reason of his failure too. It was, 
because the separation between the spirit of daily life 
and the spirit of the hour of prayer was too wide. 
We begin to see that the desire for the glory of the 
Father is not something that we can awake and pre- 
sent to our Ivord when we prepare ourselves to pray. 
No ! it is only when the whole life, in all its parts, is 
given up to God's glory, that we can really pray to 
His glory too. '''Do all to the glory of God," and, 
^^Ask all to the glory of God," — these twin com- 
mands are inseparable : obedience to the former is the 
secret of grace for the latter. A life to the glory of 
God is the condition of the prayers that Jesus can 
answer, " that the Father may be glorified." 

This demand in connection with prevailing prayer 
— that it should be to the glory of God— is no more 
than right and natural. There is none glorious but 
the Lord : there is no glory but His, and what He 
layeth on His creatures. Creation exists to show forth 
His glory; all that is not for His glory is sin, and 
darkness, and death : it is only in the glorifying of 
God that the creatures can find glory. What the Son 
of Man did, to give Himself wholly. His whole life, 
to glorify the Father, is nothing but the simple duty 
of every redeemed one. And Christ's reward will be 
his too. Because He gave Himself so entirely to the 
glory of the Father, the Father crowned Him with 
glory and honor, giving the kingdom into His hands, 
with the power to ask what He will, and, as Inter- 
cessor, to answer our prayers. And just as we be- 
come one with Christ in this, and as our prayer is part 
159 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of a life utterly surrendered to God's glory, will the 
Saviour be able to glorify the Father to us by the ful- 
filment of the promise : " Whatsoever ye shall ask, / 
wi/l do ity 

To such a life, with God's glory our only aim, we 
cannot attain by any efifort of our own. It is only in 
the man Christ Jesus that such a life is to be seen : in 
Him it is to be found for us. Yes, blessed be God ! 
His life is our life ; He gave Himself io^ us ; He Him- 
self is now our life. The discovery, and the confes- 
sion, and the denial, of self, as usurping the place of 
God, of self-seeking and self-trusting, is essential, and 
yet is what we cannot accomplish in our own strength. 
It is the incoming and indwelling, the Presence and 
the Rule in the heart, of our Lord Jesus who glorified 
the Father on earth, and is now glorified with Him, 
that thence He might glorify Him in us ; — it is Jesus 
Himself coming in, who can cast out all self-glorify- 
ing, and give us instead His own God-glorifying life 
and Spirit. It is Jesus, who longs to glorify the Father 
in hearing our prayers, who will teach us to live and 
to pray to the glory of God. 

And what motive, what power is there that can 
urge our slothful hearts to yield themselves to our 
Lord to work this in us? Surely nothing more is 
needed than a sight of how glorious, how alone 
worthy of glory the Father is. Let our faith learn in 
adoring worship to bow before Him, to ascribe to 
Him alone the kingdom, and the power, and the 
glory, to yield ourselves to dwell in His light as the 
ever-blessed, ever-loving One. Surely we shall be 
1 60 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

stirred to say, "To Him alone be glory." And we 
shall look to our Lord Jesus with new intensity of de- 
sire for a life that refuses to see or seek ought but the 
glory of God. When there is but little prayer that 
can be answered, the Father is not glorified. It is a 
duty, for the glory of God, to live and pray so that our 
prayer can be answered. For the sake of God's 
glory, let us learn to pray well. 

What a humbling thought that so often there is 
earnest prayer for a child or a friend, for a work or a 
circle, in which the thought of our joy or our pleasure 
was far stronger than any yearnings for God's glory. 
No wonder that there are so many unanswered 
prayers : here we have the secret. God would not 
be glorified when that glory was not our object. He 
that would pray the prayer of faith, will have to give 
himself to live literally so that the Father in all things 
may be glorified in him. This must be his aim : 
without this there cannot be the prayer of faith. 
"How can ye believe," said Jesus, "which receive 
glory of one another, and the glory that cometh from 
the only God ye seek not ? " All seeking of our own 
glory with men makes faith impossible : it is the deep, 
intense self-sacrifice that gives up its own glory, and 
seeks the glory of God alone, that wakens in the soul 
that spiritual susceptibility of the Divine, which is 
faith. The surrender to God to seek His glory, and 
the expectation that He will show His glory in hear- 
ing us, are one at root: He that seeks God's glory 
will see it in the answer to his prayer, and he alone. 

And how, we ask again, shall we attain to it ? Let 
II i6i 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

us begin with confession. How httle has the glory of 
God been an all-absorbing passion ; how little our 
lives and our prayers have been full of it. How little 
have we lived in the likeness of the Son, and in sym- 
pathy with Him — for God and His glory alone. Let 
us take time, until the Holy Spirit discover it to us, 
and we see how wanting we have been in this. True 
knowledge and confession of sin are the sure path to 
deliverance. 

And then let us look to Jesus. In Him we can see 
by what death we can glorify God. In death He 
glorified Him ; through death He was glorified with 
Him. It is by dying, being dead to self and living to 
God, that we can glorify Him. And this— this death 
to self, this life to the glory of God— is what Jesus 
gives and lives in each one who can trust Him for it. 
Let nothing less than these— the desire, the decision 
to live only for the glory of the Father, even as Christ 
did ; the acceptance of Him with His life and strength 
working it in us ; the joyful assurance that we can live 
to the glory of God, because Christ lives in us ; let 
this be the spirit of our daily life. Jesus stands surety 
for our living thus; the Holy Spirit is given, and 
waiting to make it our experience, if we will only 
trust and let Him ; O let us not hold back through 
unbelief, but confidently take as our watchword— All 
to the glory of God ! The Father accepts the will, 
the sacrifice is well-pleasing ; the Holy Spirit will seal 
us within the consciousness, we are living for God and 
His glory. 

And then what quiet peace and power there will be 
162 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

in our prayers, as we know ourselves, through His 
grace, in perfect harmony with Him who says to us, 
when He promises to do what we ask: ''That the 
Father may be glorified in the Son." With our whole 
being consciously yielded to the inspiration of the 
Word and Spirit, our desires will be no longer ours, 
but His ; their chief end the glory of God. With in- 
creasing liberty we shall be able in prayer to say : 
Father ! Thou knowest we ask it only for Thy glory. 
And the condition of prayer-answers, instead of being 
as a mountain we cannot climb, will only give us the 
greater confidence that we shall be heard, because we 
have seen that praj'^er has no higher beauty or blessed- 
ness than this, that it glorifies the Father. And the 
precious privilege of prayer will become doubly 
precious because it brings us into perfect unison with 
the Beloved Son in the wonderful partnership He 
proposes : " Vou ask, and I do, that the Father may 
be glorified in the Son." 

"Lord teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord Jesus ! I come again to Thee. Every 
lesson Thou givest me convinces me more deeply 
how little I know to pray aright. But every lesson 
also inspires me with hope that Thou art going to 
teach me, that Thou art teaching me not only to 
know what prayer should be, but actually to pray as 
I ought. O my Lord ! I look with courage to Thee, 
the Great Intercessor, who didst pray and dost hear 
163 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

praj^er, only that the Father may be glorified, to 
teach me too to live and to pray to the glory of God. 

Saviour ! to this end I yield myself to Thee again. 
I would be nothing. I have given self, as already 
crucified with Thee, to the death. Through the 
Spirit its workings are mortified and made dead ; 
Tliy life and Thy love of the Father are taking pos- 
session of me. A new longing begins to fill my soul, 
that every day, every hour, that in every prayer the 
glory of the Father may be everything to me. O my 
Lord ! I am in Thy school to learn this : teach Thou 
it me. 

And do Thou, the God of glory, the Father of 
glory, my God and my Father, accept the desire of a 
child who has seen that Thy glory is indeed alone 
worth living for. O Lord ! show me Thy glory. Let 
it overshadow me. Let it fill the temple of my 
heart. Let me dwell in it as revealed in Christ. 
And do Thou Thyself fulfil in me Thine own good 
pleasure, that Thy child should find his glory in seek- 
ing the glory of his Father. Amen. 
164 



TWENTY-FIRST I.ESSON. 

«*If ye abide in me;" or, The Ali=inclusive 
Condition. 

If ye abide in me^ and viy coords abide in you, ask what- 
soever ye will, and it shall be done unto you. — ^JoHN xv. 7. 

IN all God's intercourse with us, the promise and 
its conditions are inseparable. If we fulfil the 
conditions, He fulfils tlie promise. What He is to be 
to us depends upon what we are willing to be to 
Him. ** Draw near to God, and He will draw near 
to you." And so in prayer the unlimited promise, 
Ask whatsoever ye will, has its one shnple and nat- 
ural condition, if ye abide in me. It is Christ whom 
the Father always hears ; God is in Christ, and can 
only be reached by being in Him ; to be in Him is 
the way to have our prayer heard ; fully and wholly 
ABIDING IN Him, we have the right to ask whatso- 
ever we will, and the promise that it shall be done 
unto us. 

When we compare this promise with the experi- 
ence of most believers, we are startled by a terrible 
discrepancy. Who can number up the countless 
prayers that rise and bring no answer ? The cause 
must be either that we do not fulfil the condition, or 
God does not fulfil the promise. Believers are not 
165 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

willing to admit either, and therefore have devised a 
way of- escape from the dilemma. They put into the 
promise the qualifying clause our Saviour did not 
put there — if it be God's will; and so maintain both 
God's integrity and their own. O if they did but 
accept it and hold it fast as it stands, trusting to 
Christ to vindicate His truth, how God's Spirit would 
lead them to see the Divine propriety of such a 
promise to those who really abide in Christ in the 
sense in which He means it, and to confess that the 
failure in the fulfilling the condition is the one suf- 
ficient explanation of unanswered prayer. And how 
the Holy Spirit would then make our feebleness in 
13rayer one of the mightiest motives to urge us on to 
discover the secret, and obtain the blessing, of, full 
abiding in Christ. 

^^ If ye abide in mer As a Christian grows in 
grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, he is 
often surprised to find how the words of God grow 
too, in the new and deeper meaning with which they 
come to him. He can look back to the day when 
some word of God was opened up to him, and he 
rejoiced in the blessing he had found in it. After a 
time some deeper experience gave it a new meaning, 
and it was as if he never had seen what it contained. 
And yet once again, as he advanced in the Christian 
life, the same word stood before him again as a great 
mystery, until anew the Holy Spirit led him still 
deeper into its Divine fulness. One of these ever- 
growing, never-exhausted words, opening up to us 
step by step the fulness of the Divine life, is the 
i66 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Master's precious "Abide in me." As the union of 
the branch with the vine is one of growth, never- 
ceasing growth and increase, so our abiding in Christ 
is a life process in which the Divine life takes ever 
fuller and more complete possession of us. The 
young and feeble believer may be really abiding in 
Christ up to the measure of his light ; it is he who 
reaches onward to the full abiding in the sense in 
which the Master understood the words, who inherits 
all the promises connected with it. 

In the growing life of abiding in Christ, the first 
stage is that of faith. As the believer sees that, with 
all his feebleness, the command is really meant for 
him, his great aim is simply to believe that, as he 
knows he is in Christ, so now, notwithstanding un- 
faithfulness and failure, abiding in Christ is his imme- 
diate duty, and a blessing within his reach. He is 
specially occupied with the love, and power, and 
faithfulness of the Saviour : he feels his one need to 
be believing. 

It is not long before he sees something more is 
needed. Obedience and faith must go together. 
Not as if to the faith he has the obedience must be 
added, but faith must be made manifest in obedience. 
Faith is obedience at home and looking to the Master. 
Obedience is faith going out to do His will. He sees 
how he has been more occupied with the privilege 
and the blessings of this abiding than with its duties 
and its fruit. There has been much of self and of 
self-will that has been unnoticed or tolerated : the 
peace which, as a young and feeble disciple, he could 
167 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

enjoy in beheving goes from him ; it is in practical 
obedience that the abiding must be maintained : " If 
ye keep my commands, ye shall abide in my love." 
As before his great aim was through the mind, and 
the truth it took hold of, to let the heart rest on 
Christ and His promises ; so now, in this stage, his 
chief effort is to get his will united with the will of 
his Lord, and the heart and the life brought entirely 
under His rule. 

And yet it is as if there is something w^anting. 
The will and the heart are on Christ's side; he 
obeys and he loves his Lord. But still, why is it that 
the fleshly nature has yet so much power, that the 
spontaneous motions and emotions of tlie inmost be- 
ing are not what they should be? The will does not 
approve or allow, but here is a region beyond con- 
trol of the will. And why, also, even when there is 
not so much of positive commission to condemn, 
why so much of omission, the deficiency of that 
beauty of holiness, that zeal of love, that conformity 
to Jesus and His death, in which the life of self is 
lost, and which is surely implied in the abiding, as 
the Master meant it? There must surely be some- 
thing in our abiding in Christ and Christ in us, which 
he has not yet experienced. 

It is so. Faith and obedience are but the pithway 
of blessing. Before giving us the parable of the vine 
and the branches, Jesus had very disthictly told what 
the full blessing is to which faith and obedience are 
to lead. Three times over He had said, " If ye love 
me, keep my commandments," and spoken of the 
i68 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

tlireefold blessing with which He would crown such 
obedient love. The Holy Spirit would come from 
the Father ; the Son would manifest Himself ; the 
Father and the Son would come and make their 
abode. It is as our faith grows into obedience, and 
in obedience and love our whole being goes out and 
clings itself to Christ, that our inner life becomes 
opened up, and the capacity is formed within of re- 
ceiving the life, the spirit, of the glorified Jesus, as a 
distinct and conscious union with Christ and with the 
Father. The word is fulfilled in us: "In that day 
ye shall know that I am in my Father and ye in me, 
and I in you." We understand how, just as Christ 
is in God, and God in Christ, one together not only 
in will and in love, but in identity of nature and life, 
because they exist in each other, so we are in Christ 
and Christ in us, in union not only of will and love, 
but of life and nature too. 

It was after Jesus had spoken of us thus through 
the Holy Spirit knowing that He is in the Father, 
and even so we in Him and He in us, that He said, 
"Abide in me, and I in you. Accept, consent to 
receive that Divine life of union with myself, in virtue 
of which, as you abide in me, I also abide in you, 
even as I abide in the Father. So that your life is 
mine apd mine is yours." This is the true abiding, 
the occupying of the position in which Christ can 
come and abide ; so abiding in Him that the soul 
has come away from self to find that He has taken 
the place and become our life. It is the becoming 
as little children who have no care, and find their 
169 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

happiness in trusting and obeying the love that has 
done all for them. 

To those who thus abide, the promise comes as 
their rightful heritage: Ask whatsoever ye will. It 
cannot be otherwise. Christ has got full possession 
of them. Christ dwells in their love, their will, their 
life. Not only has their will been given up ; Christ 
has entered it, and dwells and breathes in it by His 
Spirit. He whom the Father always hears prays in 
them; they pray in Him : what they ask shall be done 
unto them. 

Beloved fellow-believer ! let us confess that it is 
because we do not abide in Christ as He would have 
us, that the Church is so impotent in presence of the 
infidelity and worldliness and heathendom, in the 
midst of which the Lord is able to make her more 
than conqueror. Let us believe that He means what 
He promises, and accept the condemnation the con- 
fession implies. 

But let us not be discouraged. The abiding of the 
branch in the Vine is a life of never-ceasing growth. 
The abiding, as the Master meant it, is within our 
reach, for He lives to give it us. Let us but be ready 
to count all things loss, and to say, " Not as though I 
had already attained ; I follow after, if that I may ap- 
prehend that for which I also am apprehended in 
Christ Jesus." Let us not be so much occupied with 
the abiding, as with Him to whom the abiding links 
us, and His fulness. Let it be Him, the whole 
Christ, in His obedience and humiliation, in His 
exaltation and power, in whom our soul moves 
170 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

and acts ; He Himself will fulfill His promise in us. 
And then as we abide and grow evermore into the 
full abiding, let us exercise our right, the will to enter 
into all God's will. Obeying what that will com- 
mands, let us claim what it promises. Let us yield 
to the teaching of the Holy Spirit to show each of us, 
according to his growth and measure, what the will 
of God is which we may claim in prayer. And let 
us rest content with nothing less than the personal 
experience of what Jesus gave when He said. "If ye 
abide in Me, ask whatsoever ye will, it shall be done 
unto you." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Beloved Lord ! do teach me to take this promise 
anew in all its simplicity, and to be sure that the only 
measure of Thy holy giving is our holy wiUing. Lord ! 
let each word of this Thy promise be anew made 
quick and powerful in my soul. 

Thou sayest: Abide in me! O my Master, my 
Life, my All, I do abide in Thee. Give Thou me to 
grow up into all Thy fulness. It is not the effort of 
faith, seeking to cling to Thee, nor even the rest of 
faith, trusting Thee to keep me ; it is not the obedience 
of the will, nor the keeping the commandments ; but 
it is Thyself living in me as in the Father, that alone 
can satisfy me. It is Thyself, my Lord, no longer 
before me and above me, but one with me, and abid- 
ing in me ; it is this I need, it is this I seek. It is 
this I trust Thee for. 

171 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Thou sayest: As^ whatsoever ye will! Lord! I 
know that the life of full, deep abiding will so renew 
and sanctify and strengthen the will that I shall have 
the light and the liberty to ask great things. Lord ! 
let my will, dead in Thy death, living in Thy life, be 
bold and large in its petitions. 

Thou sayest : It shall be dojie. O thou who art the 
the Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, give me 
in Thyself the joyous (Confidence that Thou wilt 
make this word yet more wonderfully true to me 
than ever, because it hath not entered into the heart 
of man to conceive what God hath prepared for them 
that love Him. Amen. 



NOTE. 

On a thoughtful comparison of what we mostly find 
in books or sermons on prayer, and the teaching of 
the Master, we shall find one great difference : the 
importance assigned to the answer to prayer is by no 
means the same. In the former we find a great deal 
on the blessing of prayer as a spiritual exercise even 
if there be no answer, and on the reasons why we 
should be content without it. God's fellowship ought 
to be more to us than the gift we ask ; God's wisdom 
only knows what is best ; God may bestow some- 
thing better than what He withholds. Though this 
teaching looks very high and spiritual, it is remarka- 
ble that we find nothing of it with our Lord. The 
more carefully we gather together all He spoke on 
prayer, the clearer it becomes that He wished us to 
172 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

think of prayer simply as the means to an end, and 
that tlie answer was to be the proof that we and our 
prayer are acceptable to the Father in heaven. It is 
not that Christ would have us count the gifts of higher 
value than the fellowship and favor of the Father. 
By no means. But the Father means the answer to 
be the token of His favor and of the reality of our 
fellowship with Him, " To-day thy servant knoweth 
that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O 
king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of 
his servant." 

A life marked by daily answer to prayer is the 
proof of our spiritual maturity ; that we have indeed 
attained to the true abiding in Christ ; that our will 
is truly at one with God's will ; that our faith has 
grown strong to see and take what God has prepared 
for us ; that the Name of Christ and His nature have 
taken full possession of us ; and that w^e have been 
found fit to take a place among those whom God 
admits to His counsels, and according to whose 
prayer He rules the world. These are they in whom 
something of man's original dignity hath been restored, 
in whom, as they abide in Christ, His power as the 
all-prevailing Intercessor can manifest itself, in w^hom 
the glory of His name is shown forth. Prayer is very 
blessed; ^/le answer is more blessed still, as the 
response from the Father that our prayer, our faith, 
our will are indeed as He would wish them to be. 

I make these remarks with the one desire of lead-\ 
ing my readers themselves to put together all that \ 
Christ has said on prayer, and to yield themselves to J 
173 ~ 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the full impression of the truth that when prayer is 
what it should be, or rather when we are what we 
should be, abiding in Christ, the answer must be ex- 
pected. It will bring us out from those refuges where 
we have comforted ourselves with unanswered prayer. 
It will discover us the place of power to which Christ 
has appointed His Church, and which it so little oc- 
cupies. It will reveal the terrible feebleness of our 
spiritual life as the cause of our not knowing to pray 
boldly in Christ's Name. It will urge us mightily to 
rise to a life in the full union with Christ, and in the 
fulness of the Spirit, as the secret of eflfectual prayer. 
And it will so lead us on to realize our destiny : ''At 
that day : Verily, verily, I say unto you, If ye shall 
ask anything of the Father, He will give it you in my 
Name : ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may 
be fulfilled." Prayer that is really, spiritually, ift 
union with Jesus, is always answered. 
174 



TWENTY-SECOND LESSON. 
**My words in you ; ** or, The Word and Prayer. 

If ye abide in me^ AND MY WORDS ABIDE IN YOU, 
ask whatsoever ye will and it shall be done zmto you. — 
John xv. 7. 

THE vital connection between the word and prayer 
is one of the simplest and earliest lessons of the 
Christian life. As that newly-converted heathen put 
it : I pray — I speak to my father ; I read — my Father 
speaks to me. Before prayer, it is God's word that 
prepares me for it, by revealing what the Father has 
bid me ask. In prayer, it is God's word strengthens 
me by giving my faith its warrant and its plea. And 
after prayer, it is God's word that brings me the 
answer when I have prayed, for in it the Spirit gives 
me to hear the Father's voice. Prayer is not mono- 
logue, but dialogue ; God's voice in response to mine 
is its most essential part. Listening to God's voice 
is the secret of the assurance that He will listen to 
mine. ** Incline thine ear, and hear ; " " Give ear to 
me;" ''Hearken to my voice;" are words which 
God speaks to man as well as man to God. His 
hearkening will depend on ours ; the entrance His 
words find with me, will be the measure of the power 
of my words with Him. What God's words are to 
175 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

me, is the test of what He Himself is to me, and so 
of the uprightness of my desire after Him in prayer. 

It is this connection between His word and our 
prayer that Jesus points to when He says, " If ye 
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatso- 
ever ye will, and it shall be done unto you." The 
deep importance of this truth becomes clear if w^e no- 
tice the other expression of which this one has taken 
the place. More than once Jesus had said, " Abide 
in me and I in you^ His abiding in us was the 
complement and the crown of our abiding in Him. 
But here, instead of "Ye in me and I in you,'''' He 
says, "Ye in me and my words inyou.^'' His words 
abiding are the equivalent of Himself abiding. 

What a view is here opened up to us of the place 
the words of God in Christ are to have in our spiritual 
life, and especially in our prayer. In a man's words 
he reveals hitnself. In his promises he gives himself 
azuay, he binds himself to the one who receives his 
promise. In his commands he sets forth his will, 
seeks to make himself master of him whose obedience 
he claims, to guide and use him as if he were part of 
himself. It is through our words that spirit holds fel- 
lowship with spirit, that the spirit of one man passes 
over and transfers itself into another. It is through 
the words of a man, heard and accepted, and held 
fast and obeyed, that he can impart himself to another. 
But all this in a very relative and limited sense. 

But when God, the infinite Being, in whom every- 
thing is life and power, spirit and truth, in the very 
deepest meaning of the words, — when God speaks 
176 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

forth Himself in His words, He does indeed give 
Himself, His Love and His Life, His Will and His 
Power, to those who receive these words, in a reality 
passing comprehension. In every promise He puts 
Himself in our power to lay hold of and possess ; in 
every command He puts Himself m our power for us 
to share with Him His Will, His Holiness, His Per- 
fection. In God's Word God gives us Himself ; 
His Word is nothing less than the Eternal Son, Christ 
Jesus. And so all Christ's words are God's words, 
full of a Divine quickening life and power. " The 
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they 
are life." 

Those who have made the deaf and dumb their 
study, tell us how much the power of speaking de- 
pends on that of hearing, and how the loss of hearing 
in children is followed by that of speaking too. This 
is true in a wider sense: as we hear, so we speak. 
This is true in the highest sense of our intercourse 
with God. To offer a prayer— to give utterance to 
certain wishes and to appeal to certain promises— is 
an easy thing, and can be learned of man by human 
wisdom. But to pray in the Spirit, to speak words 
that reach and touch God, that affect and influence 
the powers of the unseen world, — such praying, such 
speaking, depends entirely upon our hearing God's 
voice. Just as far as we listen to the voice and lan- 
guage that God speaks, and in the words of God re- 
ceive His thoughts, His mind, His life, into our heart, 
we shall learn to speak in the voice and the language 
that God hears. It is the ear of the learner, wakened 
12 177 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

morning by morning, that prepares for the tongue of 
the learned, to speak to God as well as men, as should 
be (Isa. 1. 4). 

This hearing the voice of God is something more 
than the thoughtful study of the Word. There may 
be a study and knowledge of the Word, in which 
there is but little real fellowship with the living God. 
But there is also a reading of the Word, in the very 
presence of the Father, and under the leading of the 
Spirit, in which the Word comes to us in living power 
from God Himself ; it is to us the very voice of the 
Father, a real personal fellowship with Himself. It is 
the living voice of God that enters the heart, that brings 
blessing and strength, and awakens the response of 
a living faith that reaches the heart of God again. 

It is on this hearing the voice, that the power both 
to obey and believe depends. The chief thing is, not 
to know what God has said we must do, but that 
God Himself sdiys it to us. It is not the law, and not 
the book, not the knowledge of what is right, that 
works obedience, but the personal influence of God 
and His living fellowship. And even so it is not the 
knowledge of whai God has promised, but the pre- 
sence of God Himself as the promiser, that awakens 
faith and trust in prayer. It is only in the full pre- 
sence of God that disobedience and unbelief become 
impossible. 

" If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you^ 

ask whatsover ye will, it shall be done unto you." 

We see what this means. In the words the Saviour 

gives Himself. We must have the words in tis, taken 

178 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

up into our will and life, reproduced in our disposi- 
tion and conduct. We must have them abiding in 
us : our whole life one continued exposition of the 
words that are within, and filling us ; the words re- 
vealing Christ within, and our life revealing Him 
without. It is as the words of Christ enter our very 
heart, become our life and influence it, that our words 
will enter His heart and influence Him. My prayer 
will depend on my life : what God's words are to me 
and in me, my words will be to God and in God. If 
I do what God says, God will do what I say. 

How well the Old Testament saints understood 
this connection between God's words and ours, and 
how really prayer with them was the loving response 
to what they had heard God speak ! If the word 
were a promise, they counted on God to do as He had 
spoken. "Do as Thou hast said;" "For Thou, 
Lord, hast spoken it;" ** According to Thy pro- 
mise : " " According to Thy word : " in such expres- 
sions they showed that what God spake in promise was 
the root and the life of what they spake in prayer. 
If the word was a command, they simply did as the 
Loi'd had spokeit : "So Abram departed as the Lord 
had spoken." Their life was fellowship with God, 
the interchange of word and thought. What God 
spoke they heard and did ; what they spoke God 
heard and did. In each word He speaks to us, the 
whole Christ gives Himself to fulfil it for us. For 
each word He asks no less that we give the whole 
man to keep that word, and to receive its fulfilment. 

* ' If my words abide in you : " the condition is sim- 
179 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

pie and clear. In His words His will is revealed. As 
the words abide in me, His will rules me ; my will 
becomes the empty vessel which His will fills, the 
willing instrument which His will wields; He fills 
my inner being. In the exercise of obedience and 
faith my will becomes ever stronger, and is brought 
into deeper inner harmony with Him. He can fully 
trust it to will nothing but what He wills ; He is not 
afraid to give the promise, " If my words abide in 
you, ask whatsoever ye will, it shall be done unto 
you." To all who believe it, and act upon it, He will 
make it literally true. 

Disciples of Christ ! is it not becoming more and 
more clear to us that while we have been excusing 
our unanswered prayers, our impotence in prayer, 
with a fancied submission to God's wisdom and will, 
the real reason has been that our own feeble life has 
been the cause of our feeble prayers. Nothing can 
make strong men but the word coming to us from 
God's mouth : by that we must live. It is the word 
of Christ, loved, lived in, abiding in us, becoming 
through obedience and action part of our being, that 
makes us one with Christ, that fits us spiritually for 
taking hold of God. All that is of the world passeth 
away ; he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever. 
O let us yield heart and life to the words of Christ, 
the words in which He ever gives Himself, the per- 
sonal living Saviour, and His promise will be our rich 
experience : " If ye abide in me, and my words abide 
in you, ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done 
unto you."— "Lord, teach us to pray." 
i8o 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Blessed Lord ! Thy lesson this day has again dis- 
covered to me my folly. I see how it is that my 
prayer has not been more believing and prevailing. 
I was more occupied with my speaking to Thee than 
Thy speaking to me. I did not understand that the 
secret of faith is this: there can be only so much 
faith as there is of the Living Word dwelling in the 
soul. 

And Thy word has taught me so clearly : Let 
every man be swift to hear, slow to speak ; let not 
thine heart be hasty to utter anything before God. 
Lord, teach me that it is only with Thy word taken 
up into my life that my words can be taken into Thy 
heart ; that Thy word, if it be a living power within 
me, will be a living power with Thee ; what Thy 
mouth hath spoken Thy hand will perform. 

Lord ! deliver me from the uncircumcised ear. 
Give me the opened ear of the learner, wakened 
morning by morning to hear the Father's voice. 
Even as Thou didst only speak what Thou didst 
hear, may my speaking be the echo of Thy speaking 
tome. ''When Moses went into the tabernacle to 
speak with Him, he heard the voice of One 
speaking unto him from off the mercy-seat." Lord, 
may it be so with me too. Let a life and character 
bearing the one mark, that Thy words abide and are 
seen in it, be the preparation for the full blessing : 
" Ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto 
you." Amen. 

i8i 



TWENTY-THIRD LESSON. 

** Bear fruit, that the Father may give what ye 

ask :" or Obedience the Path to Power 

in Prayer. 

Ve did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, 
that ye should go and bear fruit, and that yoitr fruit should 
abide ; THAT WHATSOEVER YE SHALL ASK the Father 
in my name, He may give it you. — John xv. i6. 

The fervent effectual prayer of a RIGHTEOUS manavaileth 
much. — ^Jas. v. 1 6. 

THE promise of the Father's giving whatsoever 
we ask is here once again renewed, in such a 
connection as to show us to whom it is that such won- 
derful influence in the council chamber of the Most 
High is to be granted. "I chose you," the Master 
says, " and appointed you that ye should go and bear 
fruit, and that your fruit should abide ; " and then He 
adds, to the etid, " that whatsoever ye," the fruit- 
bearing ones, " shall ask of the Father in my name. 
He may give it you." This is nothing but the fuller 
expression of what He had spoken in the words, " If 
ye abide in me." He had spoken of the object of 
this abiding as the bearing "fruit," "more fruit," 
*-much fruit : " in this was God to be glorified, and 
182 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the mark of discipleship seen. No wonder that He 
now adds, that where the reaUty of the abiding is 
seen in fruit abounding and abiding, this would ba 
the qualification for praying so as to obtain what we 
ask. Entire consecration to the fulfilment of our 
calling is the condition of effectual prayer, is the key 
to the unlimited blessings of Christ's wonderful 
prayer-promises. 

There are Christians who fear that such a statement 
is at variance with the doctrine of free grace. But 
surely not of free grace rightly understood, nor 
with so many express statements of God's blessed 
word. Take the words of St. John ( i John iii. 22) : 
"Let us love in deed and truth; hereby shall we 
assure our heart before Him. And whatsoever we 
ask we receive of Him, because we keep His com- 
mandments, and do the things that are pleasing in 
His sight." Or take the oft-quoted words of James: 
"The fervent effectual prayer of a righteous man 
availeth much ; " that is, of a man of whom, accord- 
ing to the definition of the Holy Spirit, it can be 
said : " He that doeth righteousness, is righteous, 
even as He is righteous." Mark the spirit of so 
many of the Psalms, with their confident appeal to 
the integrity and righteousness of the supplicant. In 
Ps. xviii. David says: "The Lord rewarded me 
according to my righteousness ; according to the 
cleanness of my hands hath He recompensed me. 
... I was upright before Him, and I kept myself 
from mine iniquity : therefore hath the Lord recom- 
pensed me according to my righteousness." (Ps. 
183 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

xviii 20-26. See also Ps. vii. 3-5, xv. 1-2, xvii. 3-6, 
xxvi. 1-6, cxix. 121, 153.) If we carefully consider 
such utterances in the light of the New Testament, 
we shall find them in perfect harmony with the ex- 
pHcit teaching of the Saviour's parting words : ''If 
ye keep my commandments ye thall abide in my 
love ; " * * Ye are my friends if ye do what I command 
you." The word is indeed meant literally: '* I ap- 
pointed you that ye should go and bear fruit, //^a/, " 
then, "whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my 
name, he may give it you." 

Let us seek to enter into the spirit of what the 
Saviour here teaches us. There is a danger in our 
evangelical religion of looking too much at what it 
offers from one side, as a certain experience to be 
obtained in prayer and faith. There is another side 
which God's word puts very strongly, that of obe- 
dience, as the only path to blessing. What we need 
is to realize that in our relationship to the Infinite 
Being whom we call God, who has created and re- 
deemed us, the first sentiment that ought to animate 
us is that of subjection ; the surrender to His supre- 
macy, His glory, His will. His pleasure, ought to be 
the first and uppermost thought of our life. The 
question is not how are we to obtain and enjoy His 
favor, for in this the main thing may still be self. 
But what this Being in the very nature of things 
rightfully claims, and is infinitely and unspeakably 
worthy of, is that His glory and pleasure should be 
my one object. Surrender to His perfect and blessed 
will, a life of service and obedience, is the beauty 
184 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

and the charm of heaven. Service and obedience, 
these were the thoughts that were uppermost in the 
mind of the Son when He dwelt upon earth. Service 
and obedience, these must become with us the chief 
objects of desire and aim, more so than rest or light, 
or joy or strength : in them we shall find the path to 
all the higher blessedness that awaits us. 

Just note what a prominent place the Master gives 
it, not only in this 15th chapter, in connection with 
the abiding, but in the 14th, where He speaks of the 
in-dwelling of the Three-One God. In verse 15 we 
have it: ''' If yeXov^ me keep my commandments^'''' 
and the Spirit will be given you of the Father. Then 
verse 21 : " He that hath my commandme^its and 
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me ; " and he shall 
have the special love of my Father resting on him, 
and the special manifestation of Myself. And then 
again, verse 23, one of the highest of all the exceed- 
ing great and precious promises : " If a man love me 
he will keep my words, and the Father and I will 
come and take up our abode with him." Could 
words put it more clearly that obedience is the way 
to the indwelling of the Spirit, to His revealing the 
Son within us, and to His again preparing us to be 
the abode, the home of the Father? The indwell- 
ing of the Three-one God is the heritage of them that 
obey. Obedience and faith are but two aspects of 
one act, — surrender to God and His will. As faith 
strengthens for obedience, it is in turn strengthened 
by it : faith is made perfect by works. It is to be feared 
that often our efforts to believe have been unavailing 
185 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

because we have not taken up the only position in. 
which a large faith is legitimate or possible, — that of 
entire surrender to the honor and the will of God. 
It is the man who is entirely consecrated to God and 
His will who will find the power come to claim every- 
thing that His God has promised to be for him. 

The application of this in the school of prayer is 
very simple, but very solemn. "I chose you," the 
Master says, "and appointed you that ye should go 
and bear fruit," much fruit (verses 5, 8), "and that 
your fruit should abide," that your life might be one 
of abiding fruit and abiding fruitfulness, "///«/" thus, 
as fruitful branches abiding in me, "whatsoever ye 
shall ask of the Father in my name, He may give it 
you." O how often we have sought to be able to 
pray the effectual prayer for much grace to bear 
fruit, and have wondered that the answer came not. 
It was because we were reversing the Master's order. 
We wanted to have the comfort and the joy and the 
strength first, that we might do the work easily and 
without any feeling of difficulty or self-sacrifice. And 
He wanted us in faith, without asking whether we 
felt weak or strong, whether the work was hard or 
easy, in the obedience of faith to do what He said: 
the path of fruit-bearing would have led us to the 
place and the power of prevailing prayer. Obe- 
dience is the only path that leads to the glory of God. 
Not obedience instead of faith nor obedience to sup- 
ply the shortcomings of faith ; no, but faith's obe- 
dience gives access to all the blessings our God has 
for us. The baptism of the Spirit (xiv. 16), the 
186 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

manifestation of the Son (xiv. 21), the indwelling of 
the Father (xiv. 23), the abiding in Christ's love (xv. 
10), the privilege of His holy friendship (xv, 14), and 
the power of all-prevailing prayer (xv. 16), — all wait 
for the obedient. 

Let us take home the lessons. Now we know the 
great reason why we have not had power in faith to 
pray prevailingly. Our life was not as it should have 
been : simple downright obedience, abiding fruitful- 
ness, was not its chief mark. And with our whole 
heart we approve of the Divine appointment : men to 
whom God is to give such influence in the rule of the 
world, as at their request to do what otherwise would 
not have taken place, men whose will is to guide the 
path in which God's will is to work, must be men 
who have themselves learned obedience, whose 
loyalty and submission to authority must be above all 
suspicion. Our whole soul approves the law : obedi- 
ence and fruit-bearing, the path to prevailing prayer. 
And with shame we acknowledge how little our lives 
have yet borne this stamp. 

Let us yield ourselves to take up the appointment 
the Saviour gives us. Let us study His relation to us 
as Master. Let us seek no more with each new day 
to think in the first place of comfort, or joy, or bless- 
ing. Let the first thought be : I belong to the Master^ 
Every moment and every movement I must act as His 
property, as a part of Himself, as one who only seeks 
to know and do His will. A servant, a slave of Jesus 
Christ, — let this be the spirit that animates me. I^ 
He says, * ' No longer do I call you servants, but I 
187 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

have called you friends," let us accept the place of 
friends : '* Ye are my friends if ye do the things which 
I command you." 

The one thing He commands us as His branches is 
to bear fruit. Let us live to bless others, to testify of 
the life and the love there is in Jesus. Let us in faith 
and obedience give our whole life to that which Jesus 
chose us for and appointed us to — fruit-bearing. As 
we think of His electing us to this, and take up our 
appointment as coming from Him who always gives 
all He demands, we shall grow strong in the con- 
fidence that a life of fruit bearing, abounding and 
abiding, is within our reach. And we shall under- 
stand why this fruit-bearing alone can be the path to 
the place of all prevailing prayer. It is the man who, 
in obedience to the Christ of God, is proving that he 
is doing what his Lord wills, for whom the Father will 
do whatsoever he will : " Whatsoever we ask we re- 
ceive, because we keep His commandments, and do 
the things that are pleasing in His sight." 

" Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Master ! teach me to apprehend fully what 
I only partly realize, that it is only through the will of 
God, accepted and acted out in obedience to His 
commands, that we obtain the power to grasp His will 
in His promises and fully to appropriate them in our 
prayers. And teach me that it is in the path of fruit- 
bearing that the deeper growth of the branch into 
i88 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the Vine can be perfected, and we attain to that per- 
fect oneness with Thyself in which we ask whatsoever 
we will. 

O Lord ! reveal to us, we pray Thee, how with all 
the hosts of heaven, and with Thyself the Son on 
earth, and with all the men of faith who have glori- 
fied Thee on earth, obedience to God is our highest 
privilege, because it gives access to oneness with Him- 
self in that which is His highest glory — His all- 
perfect will. And reveal to us, we pray Thee, how, 
in keeping Thy commandments and bearing fruit ac- 
cording to Thy will, our spiritual nature will grow up 
to the full stature of the perfect man, with power to 
ask and to receive whatsoever we will. 

O Lord Jesus ! reveal Thyself to us, and the reality 
of Thy purpose and Thy power to make these Thy 
wonderful promises the daily experience of all who 
utterly yield themselves to Thee and Thy words. 
Amen. 

189 



TWENTY-FOURTH IvESSON. 
** In my Name ; " or, The AII=PrevaiIing Plea. 

Whatsoever ye shall ask IN MY NAME, thai "will I do. If 
ye shall ask vie any thing in MY Name, that ivill I do. 
That "whatsoever ye shall ask the Father IN MY Name, He 
may give it yon. Verily, verily, I say unto yon ^ If ye shall 
ask a7iything of the Father, He will give it you IN MY 
Name. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in MY Name : 
ask, and ye shall receive. In that day ye shall ask in MY 
Name. — ^John xiv. 13, 14, xv. 16, xvi. 23, 24, 26. 

HITHERTO the disciples had not asked in the 
Name of Christ, nor had He Himself ever used 
the expression. The nearest approach is, "met 
together in my Name." Here in His parting words, 
He repeats the word unceasingly in connection with 
those promises of unlimited meaning, " Whatsoever.'''' 
''Anything,''' " What ye zuill,^' to teach them and us 
that His Name is our only, but also our all-sufficient 
plea. The power of prayer and the answer depend 
on the right use of the Name. 

What is a person's name ? That word or expression 
in which the person is called up or represented to us. 
When I mention or hear a name, it calls up before me 
the whole man, what I know of him, and also the im- 
pression he has made on me. The name of a king 
190 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

incrudes his honor, his power, his kingdom. His 
name is the symbol of his power. And so each name 
of God embodies and represents some part of the 
glory of the Unseen One. And the Name of Christ 
is the expression of all He has done and all He is and 
lives to do as our Mediator. 

And what is it to do a thing in the name of another ? 
It is to come with the power and authority of that 
other, as his representative and substitute. We know 
how such a use of another's name always supposes a 
community of interest. No one would give another 
the free use of his name without first being assured 
that his honor and interest were as safe with that 
other as with himself. 

And what is it when Jesus gives us power over His 
Name, the free use of it, with the assurance that 
whatever we ask in it will be given to us ? The ordi- 
nary comparison of one person giving another, on 
some special occasion, the liberty to ask something 
in his name, comes altogether short here, — Jesus 
solemnly gives to all His disciples a general and un- 
limited power of the free use of His Name at all 
times for all they desire. He could not do this if He 
did not know that He could trust us with His inter- 
-ests, that His honor would be safe in our hands. The 
free use of the name of another is always the token 
of great confidence, of close union. He who gives 
his name to another stands aside, to let that other act 
for him ; he who takes the name of another, gives up 
his own as of no value. When I go in the name of 
another, I deny myself, I take not only his name, 
191 . 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

but himself and what he is, instead of myself and 
what I am. 

Such a use of the name of a person may be in virtue 
of a legal union. A merchant leaving his home and 
business, gives his chief clerk a general power, by 
which he can draw thousands of pounds in the mer- 
chant's name. The clerk does this, not for himself, 
but only in the interests of the business. It is because 
the merchant knows and trusts him as wholly devoted 
to his interests and business, that he dares put his 
name and property at his command. When the Lord 
Jesus went to heaven. He left His work, the manage- 
ment of His kingdom on earth, in the hands of His 
servants. He could not do otherwise than also give 
them His name to draw all the supplies they needed 
for the due conduct of His business. And they have 
the spiritual power to avail themselves of the Name 
of Jesus just to the extent to which they yield them- 
selves to live only for the interests and the work of 
the Master. The use of the Name always supposes 
the surrender of our interests to Him whom we 
represent. 

Or such a use of the name may be in virtue of a 
life union. In the case of the merchant and his 
clerk, the union is temporary. But we know how 
oneness of life on earth gives oneness of name: a 
child has the father's name because he has his life. 
And often the child of a good father has been honored 
or helped by others for the sake of the name he bore. 
But this would not last long if it were found that it 
was only a name, and that the father's character was 
192 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

wanting. The name and the character or spirit must 
be in harmony. When such is the case, the child will 
have a double claim on the father's friends: the 
character secures and increases the love and esteem 
rendered first for the name's sake. So it is with 
Jesus and the believer : we are one, we have one life, 
one Spirit with Him ; for this reason we may come in 
His Name. Our power in using that Name, whether 
with God, or men, or devils, depejids on the -measure 
of our spiritual life-imio7i. The use of the name 
rests on the unity of life ; the Name and the Spirit of 
Jesus are one.i 

Or the union that empowers to the use of the name 
may be the union of love. When a bride whose life 
has been one of poverty, becomes united to the bride- 
groom, she gives up her own name, to be called by 
his, and has now the full right to use it. She pur- 
chases in his name, and that name is not refused. 
And this is done because the bridegroom has chosen 
her for himself, counting on her to care for his inte- 
rests; they are now one. And so the Heavenly 
Bridegroom could do nothing less ; having loved us 
and made us one with Himself, what could He do 
but give those who bear His name the right to pre- 

1 ** whatsoever ye shall ask in tny Name," that is, in tny na- 
ture; for things with God are called according to their nature. 
We ask in Christ's Name, not when at the end of some request 
we say, " This I ask in the Name of Jesus Christ," but when we 
pray according to His nature, which is love, which seeketh not 
its own, but only the will of God and the good of all creatures. 
Such asking is the cry of His own Spirit in our "hesLVis.— Jukes , 
The New Man, 

13 T93 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

sent it before the Father, or to come with it to Him- 
self for all they need. And there is no one who gives 
himself really to live in the Name of Jesus, who does 
not receive in ever-increasing measure the spiritual 
capacity to ask and receive in that Name what he 
will. The bearing of the name of another supposes 
my having given up my own, and with it my own 
independent life ; but then, as surely, my possession 
of all there is in the name I have taken instead of 
my own. 

Such illustrations show us how defective the com- 
mon view is of a messenger sent to ask in the name 
of another, or a guilty one appealing to the name of 
a surety. No, Jesus Himself is with the Father ; it is 
not an absent one in whose name we come. Even 
when we pray to Jesus Himself, it must be in His 
Name. The name represents the person ; to ask in 
the Name is to ask in full union of interest and life 
and love with Himself, as one who lives in and for 
Him. Let the Name of Jesus only have undivided 
supremacy in my heart and life, my faith will grow 
to the assurance that what I ask in that Name cannot 
be refused. The name and the power of asking go 
together ; when the Name of Jesus has become the 
power that rules my life, its power in prayer with 
God will be seen, too. 

We see thus that everything depends on our own 
relation to the Name ; the power it has on my life is 
the power it will have in my prayers. There is more 
than one expression in Scripture which can make 
this clear to us. When it says, " Do all in the Name 
194 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of the Lord Jesus," we see how this is the coun- 
terpart of the other, ''Ask all.'' To do all and to ask 
all in His Name, these go together. When we read, 
** We shall walk in the Name of our God," we see 
how the power of the Name must rule in the whole 
life ; only then will it have power in prayer. It is 
not to the lips, but to the life God looks to see what 
the Name is to us. When Scripture speaks of " men 
who have given their lives for the Name of the Lord 
Jesus," or of one "ready to die for the Name of the 
Lord Jesus," we see what our relation to the Name 
must be : when it is everything to me, it will obtain 
everything for me. If I let it have all I have it will 
let me have all it has. 

"Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that 
will I do." Jesus means the promise literally. Chris- 
tians have sought to limit it ; it looked too free ; it 
was hardly safe to trust man so unconditionally. We 
did not understand that the word " in my Name " is 
its own safeguard. It is a spiritual power which no 
one can use further than he obtains the capacity for by 
his living and acting in that Name. As we bear that 
Name before men, we have power to use it before 
God. O let us plead for God's Holy Spirit to show 
us what the Name means, and what the right use of 
it is. It is through the Spirit that the Name, which 
is above every name in heaven, will take the place of 
supremacy in our hearts and life, too. 

Disciples of Jesus ! let the lessons of this day enter 
deep into your hearts. The Master says : Only pray 
in my Name: whatsoever ye ask will be given. Hea- 
195 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ven is set open to you ; the treasures and powers of 
the world of spirit are placed at your disposal on 
behalf of men around you. O come and let us learn 
to pray in the Name of Jesus. As to the disciples, 
He says to us, " Hitherto ye have not asked in my 
Name : ask, and ye shall receive." Let each disciple 
of Jesus seek to avail himself of the rights of his 
royal priesthood, and use the power placed at his 
disposal for his circle and his work. Let Christians 
awake and hear the message : your prayer can ob- 
tain what otherwise will be withheld, can accomplish 
what otherwise remains undone. O awake, and use 
the name of Jesus to open the treasures of heaven 
for this perishing world. Learn as the servants of 
the King to use His Name : " Whatsoever ye shall 
ask in my Name, that u^ill I do." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! it is as if each lesson Thou givest 
me has such fulness and depths of meaning that if I 
can only learn that one, I shall know how to pray 
aright. This day I feel again as if I needed but one 
prayer every day : Lord ! teach me what it is to 
pray in Thy name. Teach me so to live and act, 
to walk and speak, so to do all in the Name of Jesus, 
that my prayer cannot be anything else but in that 
blessed Name too. 

And teach me, Lord ! to hold fast the precious pro- 
mise that whatsoever we ask in Thy Name, Thou 
196 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

wilt do, the Father will give. Though I do not yet 
fully understand, and still less have fully attained, the 
wondrous union Thou meanest when Thou say est, in* 
MY Name, I would yet hold fast the promise until it 
fills my heart with the undoubting assurance : Any- 
thing in the Name of Jesus. 

O my Lord ! let Thy Holy Spirit teach me this. 
Thou didst say of Him, " The Comforter, whom the 
Father shall send in my Name." He knows what it 
is to be sent from heaven in Thy Name, to reveal and 
to honor the power of that Name in Thy servants, to 
use that Name alone, and so to glorify Thee. Lord 
Jesus ! let Thy Spirit dwell in me, and fill me. I 
would, I do yield my whole being to His rule and 
leading. Thy Name and Thy Spirit are one ; through 
Him Thy Name will be the strength of my life and 
my prayer. Then I shall be able for Thy Name's 
sake to forsake all, in Thy Name to speak to men 
and to God, and to prove that this is indeed the 
Name above every name. 

Lord Jesus ! O teach me by Thy Holy Spirit to 
pray in Thy Name. Amen. 



NOTE. 

" What is meant by praying in Christ's name? It 
cannot mean simply appearing before God with faith 
in the mediation of the Saviour. When the disciples 
197 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

asked Jesus to teach them to pray, He supplied them 
with petitions. And afterwards Jesus said to them, 
'* Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name." 
Until the Spirit came, the seven petitions of the 
Lord's prayer lay as it were dormant within them. 
When by the Holy Ghost Christ descended into their 
hearts, they desired the very blessings which Christ 
as our High Priest obtains for us by His prayer from 
the Father. And such petitions are always answered. 
The Father is always willing to give what Christ 
asks. The Spirit of Christ always teaches and influ- 
ences us to offer the petitions which Christ ratifies 
and presents to the Father. To pray in Christ's 
name is therefore to be identified with Christ as to 
our righteousness, and to be idc7itified with Christ in 
our desires by the indwellijig of the Holy Ghost. To 
pray in the Spirit, to pray according to the will of the 
Father, to pray in Chris fs namCy are identical ex- 
pressions. The Father Himself loveth us, and is will- 
ing to hear us ; two intercessors, Christ the Advo- 
cate above, and the Holy Ghost, the Advocate with- 
in, are the gifts of His love. 

* ' This may appear at first less consoling than a 
more prevalent one, which refers prayer in Christ's 
name chiefly to our trust in Christ's merit. The de- 
fect of this opinion is, that it does not combine the 
intercession of the Saviour with the will of the Father, 
and the indwelling Spirit's aid in prayer. Nor does 
it fully realize the mediation of Christ ; for the medi- 
ation consists not merely in that for Christ's sake the 
Holy Father is able to regard me and my prayer ; 
198 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

but also, in that Christ Himself presents my petitions 
as His petitions, desired by Him for me, even as all 
blessings are purchased for me by His precious 
blood. 

" In all prayer, the one essential condition is that 
we are able to offer it in the name of Jesus, as accord- 
ing to His desire for us, according to the Father's 
will, according to the Spirit's teaching. And thus 
praying in Christ's name is impossible without self- 
examination, without reflection, without self-denial ; 
in short, without the aid of the Spirit."— ►Sa/Z/zV, 
The Lord's Prayer, pp. 141, 142. 
199 



TWENTY-FIFTH I.BSSON. 
«« At that day : " or, The Holy Spirit and Prayer. 

In that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I 
say unto y oil, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my 
Name, He will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing 
in my Name : ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may 
be full. At that day ye shall ask in my Name ; and I say 
not, that I will pray the Father for you ; for the Father 
Himself loveth you. — JOHN xvi. 23-26. 

Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of 
God. — JUDEi 20, 21. 

THE words of John (i John ii. 12-14) to little chil- 
dren, to young men, and to fathers, suggest the 
thought that there often are in the Christian life 
three great stages of experience. The first, that of 
the new-born child, with the assurance and the joy of 
forgiveness. The second, the transition stage of 
struggle and growth in knowledge and strength ; 
young men growing strong, God's word doing its 
work in them and giving them victory over the Evil 
One. And then the final stage of maturity and ripe- 
ness ; the fathers, who have entered deeply into the 
knowledge and fellowship of the Eternal One. 
In Christ's teaching on prayer there appear to be 
200 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

three stages in the prayer-life, somewhat analogous. 
In the Sermon on the Mount we have the initial 
stage : His teaching is all comprised in one word, 
Father. Pray to your Father, your Father sees, 
hears, knows, and will reward : how much more than 
any earthly father 1 Only be childlike and trustful. 
Then comes later on something like the transition 
stage of conflict and conquest, in words like these : 
" This sort goeth not out but by fasting and prayer ; " 
" Shall not God avenge His own elect who cry day 
and night unto Him?" And then we have in the 
parting words, a higher stage. The children have 
become men : they are now the Master's friends, from 
whom He has no secrets, to whom He says, "All 
things that I heard from my Father I made known 
unto you ; " and to whom, in the oft- repeated "what- 
soever ye will," He hands over the keys of the king- 
dom. Now the time has come for the power of 
prayer in His Name to be proved. 

The contrast between this final stage and the pre- 
vious preparatory ones our Saviour marks most 
distinctly in the words we are to meditate on: 
^'Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name ; " ''At 
that day ye shall ask in my Name. ' ' We know what 
' ' at that day ' ' means. It is the day of the outpouring 
of the Holy Spirit. The great work Christ was to do 
on the cross, the mighty power and the complete vic- 
tory to be manifested in His resurrection and ascen- 
sion, were to issue in the coming down from heaven, 
as never before, of the glory of God to dwell in men. 
The Spirit of the glorified Jesus was to come and be 

20I 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the life of His disciples. And one of the marks 
of that wonderful spirit-dispensation was to be a 
power in prayer hitherto unknown— prayer in the 
Name of Jesus, asking and obtaining whatsoever they 
would, is to be the manifestation of the reality of the 
Spirit's indwelling. 

To understand how the coming of the Holy Spirit 
was indeed to commence a new epoch in the prayer- 
world, we must remember who He is, what His work, 
and what the significance of His not being given 
until Jesus was glorified. It is in the Spirit that God 
exists, for He is Spirit. It is in the Spirit that the Son 
was begotten of the Father : it is in the fellowship of 
the Spirit that the Father and the Son are one. The 
eternal never-ceasing giving to the Son which is the 
Father's prerogative, and the eternal asking and re- 
ceiving which is the Son's right and blessedness — it is 
through the Spirit that this communion of life and 
love is maintained. It has been so from all eternity. 
It is so specially now, when the Son as Mediator ever 
liveth to pray. The great work which Jesus began on 
earth of reconciling in His own body God and man, 
He carries on in heaven. To accomplish this He took 
up into His own person the conflict between God's 
righteousness and our sin. On the cross He once for 
all ended the struggle in His own body. And then 
He ascended to heaven, that thence He might in each 
member of His body carry out the deliverance and 
manifest the victory He had obtained. It is to do this 
that He ever liveth to pray: in His unceasing inter- 
cession He places Himself in living fellowship with 
202 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the unceasing prayer of His redeemed ones. Or 
rather, it is His unceasing intercession which shows 
itself in their prayers, and gives them a power they 
never had before. 

And He does this through the Holy Spirit. The 
Holy Spirit, the Spirit of the glorified Jesus, was not 
(John vii. 39), could not be, until He had been glori- 
fied. This gift of the Father was something dis- 
tinctively new, entirely different from what Old 
Testament saints had known. The work that the 
blood effected in heaven when Christ entered within 
the veil, was something so true and new, the redemp- 
tion of our human nature into fellowship with His 
resurrection-power and His exaltation-glory was so 
intensely real, the taking up of our humanity in 
Christ into the life of the Three-One God was an 
event of such inconceivable significance, that the 
Holy Spirit, who had to come from Christ's exalted 
humanity to testify in our hearts of what Christ had 
accomplished, was indeed no longer only what He 
had been in the Old Testament. It was literally true 
"the Holy Spirit was not yet, for Christ was not yet 
glorified." He came now first as the Spirit of the 
glorified Jesus. Even as the Son, who was from 
eternity God, had entered upon a new existence as 
man, and returned to heaven with what He had not 
before, so the Blessed Spirit, whom the Son, on His 
ascension, received from the Father (Acts ii. 2)3) into 
His glorified humanity, came to us with a new life, 
which He had not previously to communicate. Under 
the Old Testament He was invoked as the Spirit of 
203 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

God : at Pentecost He descended as the Spirit of the 
glorified Jesus, bringing down and communicating 
to us the full fruit and power of the accomplished 
redemption. 

It is in the intercession of Christ that the continued 
efficacy and application of His redemption is main- 
tained. And it is through the Holy Spirit descending 
from Christ to us that we are drawn up into the great 
stream of His ever-ascending prayers. The Spirit 
prays for us without words: in the depths of a heart 
where even thoughts are at times formless, the Spirit 
takes us up into the wonderful flow of the life of the 
Three-One God. Through the Spirit, Christ's prayers 
become ours, and ours are made His : we ask what 
we will, and it is given to us. We then under- 
stand from experience, " Hitherto ye have not asked 
in my Name. At that day ye shall ask in my 
Name." 

Brother ! what we need to pray in the Name of 
Christ, to ask that we may receive that our joy may 
be full, is the baptism of this Holy Ghost. This is 
more than the Spirit of God under the Old Testa- 
ment. This is more than the Spirit of conversion 
and regeneration the disciples had before Pentecost. 
This is more than tlie Spirit with a measure of His 
influence and working. This is the Holy Spirit, the 
Spirit of the glorified Jesus in His exaltation-power, 
coming on us as the Spirit of the indwelling Jesus, 
revealing the Son and the Father within. (John xiv. 
16-23.) It is when this Spirit is the Spirit not of our 
hours of prayer, but of our whole life and walk, when 
204 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

this Spirit glorifies Jesus in us by revealing the com- 
pleteness of His work, and making us wholly one 
with Him and like Him, that we can pray in His 
Name, because we are in very deed one with Him. 
Then it is that we have that immediateness of access 
to the Father of which Jesus says, " I say not that I 
will pray the Father for you." Oh ! we need to un- 
derstand and believe that to be filled with this, 
the Spirit of the glorified One, is the one need of 
God's believing people. Then shall we realize what 
it is, " with all prayer and supplication to be praying 
at all seasons in the Spirit," and what it is, " praying 
in the Holy Ghost, to keep ourselves in the love of 
God." '^At that day ye shall ask in my Name." 

And so once again the lesson comes : What our 
prayer avails, depends upon what we are and what 
our hfe is. It is living in the Name of Christ that is 
the secret of praying in the Name of Christ ; living 
in the Spirit that fits for praying in the Spirit. It is 
abiding in Christ that gives the right and power to 
ask what we will ; the extent of the abiding is the 
exact measure of the power in prayer. It is the 
Spirit dwelling within us that prays, not in words 
and thoughts always, but in a breathing and a being 
deeper than utterance. Just so much as there is of 
Christ's Spirit in us, is there real prayer. Our lives, 
our lives, O let our lives be full of Christ, and full of 
His Spirit, and the wonderfully unlimited promises 
to our prayer will no longer appear strange. " Hith- 
erto ye have asked nothing in my Name. Ask, and 
ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. At that 
205 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

day ye shall ask in my Name. Verily, verily I say 
unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my 
Name, He will give it you." 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



O my God ! in holy awe I bow before Thee, the 
Three in One. Again I have seen how the mystery 
of prayer is the mystery of the Holy Trinity. I 
adore the Father who ever hears, and the Son who 
ever lives to pray, and the Holy Spirit, proceeding 
from the Father and the Son, to lift us up into the 
fellowship of that ever-blessed, never-ceasing asking 
and receiving. I bow, my God, in adoring worship, 
before the infinite condescension that thus, through 
the Holy Spirit, takes us and our prayers into the 
Divine Life, and its fellowship of love. 

O my Blessed Lord Jesus ! teach me to understand 
Thy lesson, that it is the indwelling Spirit, streaming 
from Thee, uniting to Thee, who is the Spirit of 
prayer. Teach me what it is as an empty, wholly 
consecrated vessel, to yield myself to His being my 
life. Teach me to honor and trust Him, as a living 
Person, to lead my life and my prayer. Teach me 
specially in prayer to wait in holy silence, and give 
Him place to breathe within me His unutterable in- 
tercession. And teach me that through Him it is 
possible to pray without ceasing, and to pray without 
failing, because He makes me partaker of the never- 
ceasing and never-failing intercession in which Thou, 
206 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the Son, dost appear before the Father. Yea, Lord, 
fulfil in me Thy promise. ' ' At that day ye shall ask 
in my Name. Verily, verily, I say unto you, What- 
soever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, that 
will He give." Amen. 



NOTE. 

Prayer has often been compared to breathing ; we 
have only to carry out the comparison fully to see 
how wonderful the place is which the Holy Spirit 
occupies. With every breath we expel the impure 
air which would soon cause our death, and inhale 
again the fresh air to which we owe our life. So we 
give out from us, in confession the sins, in prayer the 
needs and the desires of our heart. And in drawing 
in our breath again, we inhale the fresh air of the 
promises, and the love, and the life of God in Christ. 
We do this through the Holy Spirit, who is the 
breath of our life. 

And this He is because He is the breath of God. 
The Father breathes Him into us, to unite Himself 
with our life. And then, just as on every expiration 
there follows again the inhaling or drawing in of the 
breath, so God draws in again His breath, and the 
Spirit returns to Him laden with the desires and 
needs of our hearts. And thus the Holy Spirit is the 
breath of the life of God and the breath of the new 
life in us. As God breathes Him out, we receive 
207 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Him in answer to prayer ; as we breathe Him back 
again, He rises to God laden with our supplications. 
As the Spirit of God, in whom the Father and the 
Son are one, and the intercession of the Son reaches 
the Father, He is to us the Spirit of prayer. True 
prayer is the living experience of the truth of the 
Holy Trinity. The Spirit's breathing, the Son's inter- 
cession, the Father's will, these three become one 
in us. 

208 



TWENTY-SIXTH LESSON. 

"I have prayed for thee;" or, Christ the 
Intercessor. 

Btit I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. — 
Luke xxii. 32. 

I say unto you ^ that I will pray the Father for you, — 
John xvi, 26. 

He everliveth to j?iake intercession. — Heb. vii. 25. 

ALL growth in the spiritual Hfe is connected with 
the clearer insight into what Jesus is to us. 
The more I realize that Christ must be all to me, and 
in me, that all in Christ is indeed for me, the 
more I learn to live the real life of faith, which, 
dying to self, lives wholly in Christ. The Christian 
life is no longer the vain struggle to live right, but 
the resting in Christ and finding strength in Him as 
our life, to fight the fight and gain the victory of 
faith. This is specially true of the life of prayer. As 
it too comes under the law of faith alone, and is seen 
in the light of the fulness and completeness there is 
in Jesus, the believer understands that it need no 
longer be a matter of strain or anxious care, but an 
experience of what Christ will do for him and in him 
— a participation in that life of Christ which, as on 
14 209 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

earth , so in heaven, ever ascends to the Father as 
prayer. And He begins to pray, not only trusting in 
the merits of Jesus, or in the intercession by which 
our unworthy prayers are made acceptable, but in 
that near and close union in virtue of which He prays 
in us and we in Him.^ The whole of salvation is 
Christ Himself : He has given Himiself to us ; He 
Himself lives in us. Because He prays, we pray too. 
As the disciples, when they saw Jesus pray, asked 
Him to make them partakers of what He knew of 
prayer, so we, now we see Him as intercessor on the 
throne, know that He makes us participate with 
Himself in the life of prayer. 

How clearly this comes out in the last night of His 
life. In His high-priestly prayer (John xvii.). He 
shows us how and what He has to pray to the Father, 
and will pray when once ascended to heaven. And 
yet He had in His parting address so repeatedly also 
connected his going to the Father with their new life 
of prayer. The two would be ultimately connected : 
His entrance on the work of His eternal intercession 
would be the commencement and the power of their 
neiv prayer- life in His Name. It is the sight of Jesus 
in His intercession that gives us power to pray in His 
Name : all right and power of prayer is Christ's ; 
He makes us share in His intercession. 

1 See on the difference between having Christ as an Advocate 
or Intercessor who stands outside of us, and the having Him 
within us, we abiding in Him and He in us through the Holy 
Spirit perfecting our union with Him, so that we ourselves can 
come directly to the Father in His Name, —the note from 
Beck of Tubingen. 

2IO 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

To understand this, think first of His intercession: 
He ever liveth to make intercession. The work of 
Christ on earth as Priest was but a beginning. It 
was as Aaron He shed His blood ; it is as Melchize- 
dek that He now lives within the veil to continue His 
work, after the power of the eternal life. As Mel- 
chizedek is more glorious than Aaron, so it is in the 
work of intercession that the atonement has its true 
power and glory. " It is Christ that died : yea, more, 
who is even at the right hand of God, who maketh 
intercession for us." That intercession is an intense 
reality, a work that is absolutely necessary, and with- 
out which the continued application of redemption 
cannot take place. In the incarnation and resurrec- 
tion of Jesus, the wondrous reconciliation took place, 
by which man became partaker of the Divine life and 
blessedness. But the real personal appropriation of 
this reconciliation in each of His members here below 
cannot take place without the unceasing exercise of 
His Divine power by the head in heaven. In all con- 
version and sanctification, in every victory over sin 
and the world, there is a real forth-putting of the 
power of Him who is mighty to save. And this ex- 
ercise of His power only takes place through His 
prayer : He asks of the Father, and receives from 
the Father. *' He is able to save to the uttermost, 
because He ever liveth to make intercession." There 
is not a need of His people but He receives in in- 
tercession what the Godhead has to give : His medi- 
ation on the throne is as real and indispensable as 
on the cross. Nothing takes place without His inter- 

211 



With Christ in tlie School of Prayer. 

cession ; it engages all His time and powers, is 
His unceasing occupation at the right hand of the 
Father. 

And we participate not only in the benefits of this 
His work, but in the work itself. This because we 
are His body. Body and members are one : " The 
head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of thee." 
We share with Jesus in all He is and has : ''The 
glory which Thou gavest me, I have given them." 
We are partakers of His life, His righteousness, His 
work: we share with Him in His intercession too ; it 
is not a work He does without us. 

We do this because we are partakers of His life : 
" Christ is our life ; " "No longer I, but Christ Hveth 
in me." The life in Him and in us is identical, one 
and the same. His life in heaven is an ever-praying 
life. When it descends and takes possession of us, it 
does not lose its character ; in us too it is the ever- 
f7^aying life — a life that without ceasing asks and re- 
ceives from God. And this not as if there were two 
separate currents of prayer rising upwards, one from 
Him, and one from His people. No, but the sub- 
stantial life-union is also prayer-union : what He 
prays passes through us, what we pray passes through 
Him. He is the angel with the golden censer: 
"Unto Him there was given much incense," the 
secret of acceptable prayer, " that He should add it 
unto the prayers of all the saints upon the golden 
altar." We live, we abide in Him, the Interceding 
One. 

The Only-begotten is the only one who has the 

212 



With Christ in the School of Prayer 

right to pray, to Him alone it was said, "Ask, and it 
shall be given Thee." As in all other things the 
fulness dwells in Him, so the true prayer-fulness too ; 
He alone has the power of prayer. And just as the 
growth of the spiritual life consists in the clearer in- 
sight that all the treasures are in Him, and that we 
too are ifi Him, to receive each moment what we 
possess in Him, grace for grace, so with the prayer- 
life too. Our faith in the intercession of Jesus must 
not only be that He prays in our stead, when we do 
not or cannot pray, but that, as the Author of our life 
and our faith, He draws us on to pray in unison with 
Himself. Our prayer must be a work of faith in this 
sense too, that as we know that Jesus communicates 
His whole life in us, He also out of that prayerfulness 
which is His alone breathes into us our praying. 

To many a believer it was a new epoch in his 
spiritual life when it was revealed to him how truly 
and entirely Christ was his life, standing good as 
surety for his remaining faithful and obedient. It 
was then first that he really began to live 2, faith-life. 
No less blessed will be the discovery that Christ 
is surety for our prayer-life too, the center and em- 
bodiment of all prayer, to be communicated by Him 
through the Holy Spirit to His people. **He ever 
liveth to make intercession " as the Head of the body, 
as the Leader in that new and living way which He 
hath opened up, as the Author and the Perfecter of our 
faith. He provides in everything for the life of His 
redeemed ones by giving His own life in them : He 
cares for their life of prayer, by taking them up into 
213 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

His heavenly prayer-hfe, by giving and maintaining 
His prayer-hfe within them. ' ' I have prayed for 
thee," not to render thy faith needless, but "that thy 
faith fail not : ' ' our faith and prayer of faith is rooted 
in His. It is, **if ye abide in me," the ever-hving 
Intercessor, and pray with me and in me : " ask 
whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto you." 

The thought of our fellowship in the intercession of 
Jesus reminds us of what He has taught us more 
than once before, how all these wonderful prayer- 
promises have as their aim and their justification, the 
glory of God in the manifestation of His kingdom 
and the salvation of sinners. As long as we only or 
chiefly pray for ourselves, the promises of the last 
night must remain a sealed book to us. It is to the 
fruit-bearing branches of the Vine ; it is to disciples 
sent into the world as the Father sent Him, to live for 
perishing men ; it is to His faithful servants and in- 
timate friends who take up the work He leaves 
behind, who have like their Lord become as the 
seed-corn, losing its life to multiply it manifold ;— it is 
to such that the promises are given. Let us each find 
out what the work is, and who the souls are entrusted 
to our special prayers, let us make our intercession 
for them our life of fellowship with God, and we shall 
not only find the promises of power in prayer made 
true to us, but we shall then first begin to realize how 
our abiding in Christ and His abiding in us makes us 
share in His own joy of blessing and saving men. 

O most wonderful intercession of our Blessed Lord 
Jesus, to which we not only owe everything, but in 
214 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

which we are taken up as active partners and fellow- 
workers ! Now we understand what it is to pray in 
the Name of Jesus, and why it has such power. In 
His Name, in His Spirit, in Himself, in perfect union 
with Him. O wondrous, ever active, and most effi- 
cacious intercession of the man Christ Jesus ! when 
shall we be wholly taken up into it, and always pray 
in it? 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord ! in lowly adoration I would again 
bow before Thee. Thy whole redemption work has 
now passed into prayer : all that now occupies Thee 
in maintaining and dispensing what Thou didst pur- 
chase with Thy blood is only prayer. Thou ever 
livest to pray. And because we are and abide in 
Thee, the direct access to the Father is always open, 
our life can be one of unceasing prayer, and the 
answer to our prayer is sure. 

Blessed Lord ! Thou hast invited Thy people to be 
Thy fellow-workers in a life of prayer. Thou hast 
united Thyself with Thy people and makest them as 
Thy body share with Thee in that ministry of inter- 
cession, through which alone the world can be filled 
with the fruit of Thy redemption and the glory of the 
Father. With more liberty than ever I come to Thee, 
my Lord, and beseech Thee : Teach me to pray. 
Thy life is prayer, Thy life is mine. Lord ! teach me 
to pray, in Thee, like Thee. 

And, O my Lord ! give me specially to know, as 
215 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Thou didst promise Thy disciples, that Thou art in 
the Father, and I in Thee, and Thou in me. Let the 
uniting power of the Holy Spirit make my whole life 
an abiding in Thee and Thy intercession, so that my 
prayer may be its echo, and the Father hear me in 
Thee and Thee in me. Lord Jesus ! let Thy mind 
in everything be in me, and my life in everything be 
in Thee. So shall I be prepared to be the channel 
through which Thy intercession pours its blessing on 
the world. Amen. 



NOTE. 

" The new epoch of prayer in the Name of Jesus is 
pointed out by Christ as the time of the outpouring 
of the Spirit, in which the disciples enter upon a 
more enlightened apprehension of the economy of 
redemption, and become as clearly conscious of their 
oneness with Jesus as of His oneness with the Father. 
Their prayer in the Name of Jesus is now directly to 
the Father Himself. ^ I say not that I will pray lox 
you, for the Father Himself loveth you,' Jesus says ; 
while He had previously spoken of the time before 
the Spirit's coming: '' I will pray the Father, and He 
\i\\\ give you the Comforter.' This prayer thus has 
as its central thought the insight into our being 
united to God in Christ as on both sides the living 
bond of union between God and us (John xvii. 23: 
* I in them and Thou in me '), so that in Jesus we 
behold the Father as united to us, and ourselves as 
216 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

united to the Father. Jesus Christ must have been 
revealed to us, not only through the truth in the 
mind, but in our inmost personal consciousness as 
the living personal reconciliation, as He in whom 
God's Fatherhood and Father-love have been per- 
fectly united with human nature and it with God. 
Not that with the immediate prayer to the Father, the 
mediatorship of Christ is set aside ; but it is no longer 
looked at as something external, existing outside of 
us, but as a real living spiritual existence within us, so 
that the Christ/or tis, the Mediator, has really become 
Christ -iu us. 

" When the consciousness of this oneness between 
God in Christ and us in Christ still is wanting, or has 
been darkened by the sense of guilt, then the prayer 
of faith looks to our Lord as the Advocate, who 
prays the Father /or us. (Compare John xvi. 26 with 
xiv. 16, 17, ix. 20; Luke xxii. 32; i John ii. i.) To 
take Christ thus in prayer as Advocate, is according 
to John xvi. 26 not perfectly the same as the prayer in 
His Name. Christ's advocacy is meant to lead us on 
to that inner self-standing life-union with Him, and 
with the Father in Him, in virtue of which Christ is 
He in whom God enters into immediate relation and 
unites Himself with us, and in whom we in all cir- 
cumstances enter into immediate relation with God. 
Even so the prayer in the Name of Jesus does not 
consist in our prayer at His command : the disciples 
had prayed thus ever since the Lord had given them 
His ' Our Father,' and yet He says, * Hitherto ye 
have not prayed in my Name.' Only when the 
217 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

mediation of Christ has become, through the indwell- 
ing of the Holy Spirit, life and power within us, and so 
His 7nmd, as it found expression in His word and 
work, has taketi possession of aiid filled oicr persotial 
consciousness and will, so that in faith and love we 
have Jesus in us as the Reconciler who has actually 
made us one with God, only then His Name, which 
includes His nature and His work, is become truth 
and power in us (not only for us), and we have in the 
Name of Jesus the free, direct access to the Father 
which is sure of being heard. Prayer in the Name 
of Jesus is the Hberty of a son with the Father, just 
as Jesus had this as the First-begotten. We pray in 
the place of Jesus, not as if we could put ourselves 
in His place, but in as far as we are in Him and He 
in us. We go direct to the Father, but only as the 
Father is in Christ, not as if He were separate from 
Christ. Wherever thus the inner man does not live 
in Christ and has Him not present as the Living One, 
where His word is not ruling in the heart in its Spirit- 
power, where His truth and life have not become the 
life of our soul, it is vain to think that a formula 
like 'for the sake of Thy dear Son' will avail." — 
Christliche Ethik, von Dr. I. T. Beck, Tubingen, 
iii. 39. 

218 



TWENTY-SEVENTH IvESSON. 

" Father, I will ; " or, Christ the High Priest. 

Father, I will that they also whom Thou hast given me 
may be with me where I am, — ^JOHN xvii. 24. 

IN His parting address, Jesus gives His disciples 
the full revelation of what the New Life was to 
be, when once the kingdom of God had come in 
power. In the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, in 
union with Him the heavenly Vine, in their going 
forth to witness and to suffer for Him, they were to 
find their calling and their blessedness. In between 
His setting forth of their future new life, the Lord 
had repeatedly given the most unlimited promises as 
to the power their prayers might have. And now in 
closing, He Himself proceeds to pray. To let His 
disciples have the joy of knowing what His interces- 
sion for them in heaven as their High Priest will be, 
He gives this precious legacy of His prayer to the 
Father. He does this at the same time because they as 
priests are to share in His work of intercession, that 
they and we might know how to perform this holy 
work. In the teaching of our Lord on this last night, 
we have learned to understand that these astonishing 
prayer-promises have not been given in our own 
behalf, but in the interest of the Lord and His king- 
219 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

dom ; it is from the Lord Himself alone that we can 
learn what the prayer in His Name is to be and to 
obtain. We have understood that to pray in His 
Name is to pray in perfect unity with Himself ; the 
high-priestly prayer will teach all that the prayer in 
the Name of Jesus may ask and expect. 

This prayer is ordinarily divided into three parts. 
Our Lord first prays for Himself (v. 1-5), then for His 
disciples (6-19), and last for all the believing people 
through all ages (20-26). The follower of Jesus, who 
gives himself to the work of intercession, and would 
fain try how much of blessing he can pray down upon 
his circle in the Name of Jesus, will in all humility 
let himself be led of the Spirit to study this wonder- 
ful prayer as one of the most important lessons of the 
school of prayer. 

First of all, Jesus prays for Himself, for His being 
glorified, that so He may glorify the Father. " Fa- 
ther ! glorify Thy Son. And now, Father, glorify 
me." And He brings forward the grounds on which 
He thus prays. A holy covenant had been concluded 
between the Father and the Son in heaven. The 
Father had promised Him power over all flesh as the 
reward of His work : He had done the work. He had 
glorified the Father, and His one purpose is now still 
further to glorify Him. With the utmost boldness 
He asks that the Father may glorify Him, that He 
may now be and do for His people all He has under- 
taken. 

Disciple of Jesus ! here you have the first lesson 
in your work of priestly intercession, to be learned 
220 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

from the example of your great High Priest. To 
pray in the Name of Jesus is to pray in unity, in sym- 
pathy with Him. As the Son began His prayer by 
making clear His relation to the Father, pleading 
His work and obedience and His desire to see the 
Father glorified, do so too. Draw near and appear 
before the Father in Christ. Plead His finished work. 
Say that you are one with it, that you trust on it, live 
in it. Say that you too have given yourself to finish 
the work the Father has given you to do, and to live 
alone for His glory. And ask then confidently that 
the Son may be glorified in you. This is praying in 
the Name, in the very words, in the Spirit of Jesus, in 
union with Jesus Himself. Such prayer has power. If 
with Jesus you glorify the Father, the Father will 
glorify Jesus by doing what you ask in His Name. It 
is only when your own personal relation on this point 
like Christ's, is clear with God, when you are glori- 
fying Him, and seeking all for His glory, that, like 
Christ, you will have power to intercede for those 
around you. 

Our Lord next prays for the circle of His disciples. 
He speaks of them as those whom the Father has 
given Him. Their chief mark is that they have re- 
ceived Christ's word. He says of them that He now 
sends them into the world in His place, just as the 
Father had sent Himself. And He asks two things 
for them : that the Father keep them from the evil 
one, and sanctify them through His Word, because 
He sanctifies Himself for them. 

Just like the Lord, each believing intercessor has 

221 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

his own immediate circle for whom He first prays. 
Parents have their children, teachers their pupils, 
pastors their flocks, all workers their special charge, 
all believers those whose care lies upon their hearts. 
It is of great consequence that intercession should be 
personal, pointed and definite. And then our first 
prayer must always be that they may receive the 
word. But this prayer will not avail unless with our 
Lord we say, " I have given them Thy word ;" it is 
this gives us liberty and power in intercession for 
souls. Not only pray for them, but speak to them. 
And when they have received the word, let us pray 
much for their being kept fi-om the evil one, for their 
being sanctified through that word. Instead of being 
hopeless or judging or giving up those who fall, let 
us pray for our circle, " Father ! keep them in Thy 
Name ; " " Sanctify them through Thy truth." Prayer 
in the Name of Jesus availeth much : " What ye will 
shall be done unto you." 

And then follows our Lord's prayer for a stilUvider 
circle. " I pray not only for these, but for them who 
through their word shall believe." His priestly heart 
enlarges itself to embrace all places and all time, and 
He prays that all who belong to Him may every- 
where be one, as God's proof to the world of the 
divinity of His mission, and then that they may ever 
be with Him in His glory. Until then, "that the love 
wherewith Thou hast loved me may be in them, and 
I in them." 

The disciple of Jesus, who has first in his own cir- 
cle proved the power of prayer, cannot confine him- 

222 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

self within its limits ; he prays for the Church universal 
and its different branches. He prays specially for 
the unity of the Spirit and of love. He prays for its 
being one in Christ, as a witness to the world that 
Christ, who hath wrought such a wonder as to make 
love triumph over selfishness and separation, is in- 
deed the Son of God sent from heaven. Every 
believer ought to pray much that the unity of the 
Church, not in external organizations, but in spirit 
and in truth, may be made manifest. 

So much for the matter of the prayer. Now for 
its mode. Jesus says, "Father! I will." On the 
ground of His right as Son, and the Father's promise 
to Him, and His finished work. He might do so. The 
Father had said to Him, "Ask of me, and I will give 
Thee." He simply availed Himself of the Father's 
promise. Jesus has given us a like promise : " What- 
soever ye will shall be done unto you." He asks me 
in His Name to say what I will. Abiding in Him, in 
a living union with Him in which man is nothing and 
Christ all, the believer has the liberty to take up that 
word of His High Priest and, in answer to the question, 
" What wilt thou .^ " to say, " Father ! I will all that 
Thou hast promised." This is nothing but true 
faith ; this is honoring God : to be assured that such 
confidence in saying what I will is indeed acceptable 
to Him. At first sight, our heart shrinks from the 
expression ; we feel neither the liberty nor the power 
to speak thus. It is a word for which alone in the 
most entire abnegation of our will grace will be given, 
but for which grace will most assuredly be given to 
223 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

each one who loses his will in his Lord's. He that 
loseth his will shall find it ; he that gives up his will 
entirely shall find it again renewed and strengthened 
with a Divine strength. "Father ! I will : " this is 
the keynote of the everlasting, ever-active, all-pre- 
vailing intercession of our Lord in heaven. It is only 
in union with Him that our prayer avails ; in union 
with Him it avails much. If we but abide in Him, 
living, and walking, and doing all things in His 
Name ; if we but come and bring each separate peti- 
tion, tested and touched by His Word and Spirit, and 
cast it into the mighty stream of intercession that 
goes up from Him, to be borne upward and presented 
before the Father ; — we shall have the full confidence 
that we receive the petitions we ask: the "Father! 
IwiW will be breathed into us by the Spirit Him- 
self. We shall lose ourselves in Him, and become 
nothing, to find that in our impotence we have power 
and prevail. 

Disciples of Jesus ! called to be like your Lord in 
His priestly intercession, when, O when ! shall we 
awaken to the glory, passing all conception, of this 
our destiny to plead and prevail with God for perish- 
ing men ? O when shall we shake off the sloth that 
clothes itself with the pretence of humility, and yield 
ourselves wholly to God's Spirit, that He may fill our 
wills with light and with power, to know, and to take, 
and to possess all that our God is waiting to give to 
a will that lays hold on Him. 

"Lord, TEACH us to pray." 
224 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

O my blessed High Priest ! whom am I that Thou 
shouldest thus invite me to share with Thee in Thy 
power of prevaihng intercession ? And why, O my 
Lord ! am I so slow of heart to understand and be- 
Heve and exercise this wonderful privilege to which 
Thou hast redeemed Thy people ? O Lord ! give Thy 
grace that this may increasingly be my unceasing 
life-work — in praying without ceasing to draw down 
the blessing of heaven on all my surroundings on 
earth. 

Blessed Lord ! I come now to accept this my call- 
ing. For this I would forsake all and follow Thee. 
Into Thy hands I would believingly yield my whole 
being : form, train, inspire me to be one of Thy 
prayer-legion, wrestlers who watch and strive in 
prayer, Israels, God's princes, who have power and 
prevail. Take possession of my heart, and fill it with 
the one desire for the glory of God in the ingathering, 
and sanctification, and union of those whom the 
Father hath given Thee. Take my mind and let this 
be my study and my wisdom, to know when prayer 
can bring a blessing. Take me wholly and fit me as 
a priest ever to stand before God and to bless in His 
Name. 

Blessed Lord ! be it here, as through all the spiritual 
life : Thou all, I nothing. And be it here my ex- 
perience too that he that has and seeks nothing for 
himself, receives all, even to the wonderful grace of 
sharing with Thee in Thine everlasting ministry of 
intercession. Amen. 

15 225 



TWENTY-EIGHTH I.ESSON. 

** Father ! not what I will ; »' or, Christ the Sac- 
rifice. 

And He said^ Abba^ Father^ all things are possible unto 
Thee ; remove this ctip from me ; howbeit not zvhat I will ^ 
but xuhat Thou wilt. — MARK xiv. 36. 

WHAT a contrast within the space of a few hours ! 
What a transition from the quiet elevation 
of that, *' He lifted up His eyes to heaven, and said, 
Father ! I will," to that falling on the ground and 
crying in agony, "My Father ! not what I will." In 
the one we see the High Priest within the veil in His 
all-prevailing intercession ; in the other, the sacrifice 
on the altar opening the way through the rent veil. 
The high-priestly "Father ! I will," in order of time 
precedes the sacrificial "Father! not what I will;" 
but this was only by anticipation, to show what the 
intercession would be when once the sacrifice was 
brought. In reality it was that prayer at the altar, 
** Father ! not what I will," in which the prayer before 
the throne, "Father! I will," had its origin and its 
power. It is from the entire surrender of His will in 
Gethsemane that the High Priest on the throne has 
the power to ask what He will, has the right to make 
226 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

"His people share in that power too, and ask what 
they will. — — 

For all who would learn to pray in the school 
of Jesus, this Gethsemane lesson is one of the most 
sacred and precious. To a superficial scholar it may 
appear to take away the courage to pray in faith. If 
even the earnest supplication of the Son was not 
heard, if even the Beloved had to say, " Not what I 
WILL ! " how much more do we need to speak so. 
And thus it appears impossible that the promises 
which the Lord had given only a few hours pre- 
viously, "Whatsoever ye shall ask," "Whatso- 
ever YE WILL," could have been meant literally. A 
deeper insight into the meaning of Gethsemane 
would teach us that we have just here the sure ground 
and the open way to the assurance of an answer to 
our prayer. Let us draw nigh in reverent and adoring 
wonder, to gaze on this great sight — God's Son thus 
ofifering up prayer and supplications with strong crying 
and tears, and not obtaining what He asks. He Him- 
self is our Teacher, and will open up to us the mystery of 
His holy sacrifice, as revealed in this wondrous prayer. 

To understand the prayer, let us note the infinite 
difference between what our Lord prayed for as a 
Royal High Priest, and what He here supplicates 
in His weakness. There it was for the glorifying of 
the Father He prayed, and the glorifying of Himself 
and His people as the fulfilment of distinct promises 
that had been given Him. He asked what He knew 
to be according to the word and the will of the 
Father; He might boldly say, "Father! I will." 
227 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Here He prays for something in regard to which the 
Father's will is not yet clear to Him. As far as He 
knows, it is the Father's will that He should drink the 
cup. He had told His disciples of the cup He must 
drink: a little later He would again say, "The cup 
which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it ? " 
It was for this He had come to this earth. But when, 
in the unutterable agony of soul that burst upon Him 
as the power of darkness came upon Him, and He 
began to taste the first drops of death as the wrath of 
God against sin, His human nature, as it shuddered 
in presence of the awful reality of being made a 
curse, gave utterance in this cry of anguish, to its 
desire that, if God's purpose could be accomplished 
without it, He might be spared the awful cup : " Let 
this cup pass from me." That desire was the evi- 
dence of the intense reality of His humanity. The 
" Not as I will " kept that desire from being sinful : as 
He pleadingly cries, *' All things are possible with 
Thee," and returns again to still more earnest prayer 
that the cup may be removed, it is His thrice-repeated 
*' Not what I will " that constitutes the very 
essence and worth of His sacrifice. He had asked 
for something of which He could not say : I know it 
is Thy will. He had pleaded God's power and love, 
and had then withdrawn it in His final '*Thy will 
BE DONE." The prayer that the cup should pass 
away could not be answered ; the prayer of submis- 
sion that God's will be done was heard, and gloriously 
answered in His victory first over the fear, and then 
over the power of death. 

228 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

It is in this denial of His will, this complete sur- 
render of His will to the will of the Father, that 
Christ's obedience reached its highest perfection. It 
is from the sacrifice of the will in Gethsemane that 
the sacrifice of the life on Calvary derives its value. 
It is here, as Scripture saith, that He learned obedi- 
ence, and became the author of everlasting salvation 
to all that obey Him. It was because He there, in 
that prayer, became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross, that God hath highly exalted Him, 
and given Him the power to ask what He will. It 
was in that " Father ! not what I will," that He ob- 
tained the power for that other "Father! I will." 
It was by Christ's submittal in Gethsemane to have 
not His will done, that He secured for His people the 
right to say to them, ''Ask whatsoever ye will." ~ — ^ 

Let me look at them again, the deep mysteries that 
Gethsemane offers to my view. There is the first: 
the Father offers His Well-beloved the cup, the cup 
of wrath. The second : the Son, always so obedient, 
shrinks back, and implores that He may not have to 
drink it. The third : the Father does not grant the 
Son His request, but still gives the cup. And then 
the last : the Son yields His will, is content that His 
will be not done, and goes out to Calvary to drink 
the cup. O Gethsemane ! in thee I see how my Lord 
could give me such unlimited assurance of an answer 
to my prayers. As my surety He won it for me, by 
His consent to have His petition unanswered. 

This is in harmony with the whole scheme of re- 
demption. Our Lord always wins for us the opposite 
229 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

of what He suffered. He was bound that we might 
go free. He was made sin that we might become 
the righteousness of God. He died that we might 
hve. He bore God's curse that God's blessing 
might be ours. He endured the not answering of 
His prayer that our prayers might find an answer. 
Yea, He spake, " Not as I will,''' that He might say 
to us, ** If ye abide in me ask what ye will ; it shall 
be done unto you." 

Yes, " If ye abide in me ; " here in Gethsemane 
the word acquires new force and depth. Christ is 
our Head, who as surety stands in our place, and 
bears what we must for ever have borne. We had 
deserved that God should turn a deaf ear to us, and 
never listen to our cry. Christ comes, and suffers 
this too for us : He suffers what we had merited ; for 
our sins He suffers beneath the burden of that unan- 
swered prayer. But now His suffering this avails for 
me : what He has borne is taken away from me ; 
His merit has won forme the answer to every prayer, 
if I abide in Him. 

Yes, in Him, as He bows there in Gethsemane, I 
must abide. As my Head, He not only once suf- 
fered for me, but ever lives in me, breathing and 
working His own disposition in me too. The Eter- 
nal Spirit, through which He offered Himself unto 
God, is the Spirit that dwells in me too, and makes 
me partaker of the very same obedience, and the 
sacrifice of the will unto God. That spirit teaches 
me to yield my will entirely to the will of the Father, 
to give it up even unto the death, in Christ to be dead 
230 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

to it. Whatever is my own mind and thought and 
will, even though it be not directly sinful, He teaches 
me to fear and flee. He opens my ear to wait in great 
gentleness and teachableness of soul for what the 
Father has day by day to speak and to teach. He 
discovers to me how union with God's will in the 
love of it, is union with God Himself ; how entire 
surrender to God's will is the Father's claim, the 
Son's example, and the true blessedness of the soul. 
He leads my will into the fellowship of Christ's 
death and resurrection: my will dies in Him, in Him 
to be made alive again. He breathes into it, as a 
renewed and quickened will, a holy insight into 
God's perfect will, a holy joy in yielding itself to be 
an instrument of that will, a holy liberty and power 
to lay hold of God's will to answer prayer. With my 
whole will I learn to live for the interests of God and 
His kingdom, to exercise the power of that will — 
crucified but risen again — in nature and in prayer, on 
earth and in heaven, with men and with God. The 
more deeply I enter into the " Father ! not what 
I WILL " of Gethsemane, and into Him who spake it, 
to abide in Him, the fuller is my spiritual access into 
the power of His " Father ! I will." And the soul 
experiences that it is the will, which has become 
nothing that God's will may be all, which now be- 
comes inspired with a Divine strength to really will 
what God wills, and to claim what has been promised 
it in the name of Christ. 

O let us listen to Christ in Gethsemane, as He calls, 
" If ye abide in me, ask whatsoever ye will, and it 
231 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

shall be done unto you." Being of one mind and 
spirit with Him in His giving up everything to God's 
will, living like Him in obedience and surrender to 
the Father ; this is abiding in Him ; this is the secret 
of power in prayer. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Blessed Lord Jesus ! Gethsemane was Thy school, 
where Thou didst learn to pray and to obey. It is still 
Thy school, where Thou leadest all Thy disciples 
who would fain learn to obey and to pray even as 
Thou. Lord ! teach me there to pray, in the faith 
that Thou hast atoned for and conquered our self- 
will, and canst indeed give us grace to pray like 
Thee. 

O Lamb of God ! I would follow Thee to Geth- 
semane, there to become one with Thee, and to 
abide in Thee as Thou dost unto the very death 
yield Thy will unto the Father. With Thee, through 
Thee, in Thee, I do yield my will in absolute and 
entire surrender to the will of the Father. Conscious 
of my own weakness, and the secret power with 
which self-will would assert itself and again take its 
place on tlie throne, I claim in faith the power of Thy 
victory. Thou didst triumph over it and deliver me 
from it. In Thy death I would daily live ; in Thy life 
I would daily die. Abiding in Thee, let my will, 
through the power of Thine eternal Spirit, only be 
the tuned instrument which yields to every touch of 
232 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the will of my God. With my whole soul do 1 say 
with Thee, and in Thee, '' Father ! not as I will, but 
as Thou wilt." 

And then. Blessed Lord ! open my heart and that 
of all Thy people, to take in fully the glory of the 
truth, that a will given up to God is a will accepted 
of God to be used in His service, to desire, and pur- 
pose, and determine, and will what is according to 
God's will. A will which, in the power of the Holy 
Spirit the indwelling God, is to exercise its royal pre- 
rogative in prayer, to loose and to bind in heaven and 
upon earth, to ask whatsoever it will, and to say it 
shall be done. 

O Lord Jesus ! teach me to pray. Amen. 
233 



TWENTY-NINTH LESSON. 

•♦If we ask according to His will ; " or, Our Bold» 
ness in Prayer. 

And this is the boldness which we have toward Hijn^ that^ 
if we ASK ANYTHING ACCORDING TO HiS WILL, He 
heareth us. Attd if we know that He hear us, WHATSO- 
EVER WE ASK, we know that wE HAVE THE PETITIONS 
which we have asked of Him. — i John v. 14, 15. 

ONE of the greatest hindrances to believing prayer 
is with many undoubtedly this : they know not 
if what they ask is according to the will of God. As 
long as they are in doubt on this point, they cannot 
have the boldness to ask in the assurance that they 
certainly shall receive. And they soon begin to 
think that, if once they have made known their 
requests, and receive no answer, it is best to leave it 
to God to do according to His good pleasure. The 
words of John, If we ask anything accordi7ig to His 
zvill, He heareth us," as they understand them, make 
certainty as to answer to prayer impossible, because 
they cannot be sure of what really may be the will of 
God. They think of God's will as His hidden counsel 
— how should man be able to fathom what really may 
be the purpose of the all-wise God. 
This is the very opposite of what John aimed at in 
234 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

writing thus. He wished to rouse us to boldness, to 
confidence, to full assurance of faith in prayer. He 
says, " This is the boldness which we have toward 
Hi7n,''^ that we can say: Father ! Thou knowest and 
I know that I ask according to Thy will : I know 
Thou hearest me. " This is the boldness, that if we 
ask anything according to His will, He heareth us." 
On this account He adds at once : " If we know that 
He heareth us whatsoever we ask, we know,^'' through 
this faith, "that we have," that we now while we 
pray receive "the petition," the special things, "we 
have asked of Him." John supposes that when 
we pray, we first find out if our prayers are according 
to the will of God. They may be according to God's 
will, and yet not come at once, or without the perse- 
vering prayer of faith. It is to give us courage thus 
to persevere and to be strong in faith, that He tells 
us : This gives us boldness or confidence in prayer, if 
we ask anything according to His will. He heareth 
us. It is evident that if it be a matter of uncertainty 
to us whether our petitions be according to His will, 
we cannot have the comfort of what He says, "We 
know that we have the petitions which we have asked 
ofHim." 

But just this is the difficulty. More than one be- 
liever says : " I do not know if what I desire be 
according to the will of God. God's will is the pur- 
pose of His infinite wisdom : it is impossible for me 
to know whether He may not count something else 
better for me than what I desire, or may not have 
some reasons for withholding what I ask. ' ' Every one 
235 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

feels how with such thoughts the prayer of faith, of 
which Jesus said, "Whosoever shall believe that 
these things which he saith shall come to pass, he 
shall have whatsoever \\q saith," becomes an impos- 
sibility. There may be the prayer of submission, 
and of trust in God's wisdom ; there cannot be the 
prayer of faith. The great mistake here is that God's 
children do not really believe that it is possible to 
know God's will. Or if they believe this, they do not 
take the time and trouble to find it out. What we 
need is to see clearly in what way it is that the Father 
leads His waiting, teachable child to know that his 
petition is according to His will.^ It is through God's 
holy word, taken up and kept in the heart, the life, 
the will ; and through God's Holy Spirit, accepted in 
His indwelling and leading, that we shall learn to 
know that our petitions are according to His will. 

Through the word. There is a secret will of God, 
with which we often fear that our prayers may be at 
variance. It is not with this will of God, but His will 
as revealed in His word, that we have to do in 
prayer. Our notions of what the secret will may 
have decreed, and of how it might render the answers 
'to our prayers impossible, are mostly very erroneous. 
Childlike faith as to what He is willing to do for His 
children, simply keeps to the Father's assurance, 
that it is His will to hear prayer and to do what faith 
in His word desires and accepts. In the word tlie 
Father has revealed in general promises the great 

J See this illustrated in the extracts from George Muller at 
the end of this volume. 

236 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

principles of His will with His people. The child 
has to take the promise and apply it to the special 
circumstances in His life to which it has reference. 
Whatever he asks within the limits of that revealed 
will, he can know to be according to the will of God, 
and he may confidently expect. In His word, God 
has given us the revelation of His will and plans 
with us, with His people, and with the world, with 
the most precious promises of the grace and power 
with which through His people He will carry out His 
plans and do His work. As faith becomes strong 
and bold enough to claim the fulfilment of the general 
promise in the special case, we may have the assur- 
ance that our prayers are heard: they are according to 
God's will. Take the words of John in the verse fol- 
lowing our text as an illustration: "If any man see 
his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall- ask 
and God will give him life.'" Such is the general 
promise ; and the believer who pleads on the ground 
of this promise, prays according to the will of God, 
and John would give him boldness to know that he 
has the petition which he asks. 

But this apprehension of God's will is something 
spiritual, and must be spiritually discerned. It is not 
as a matter of logic that we can argue it out : God 
has said it ; I must have it. Nor has every Christian 
the same gift or calling. While the general will 
revealed in the promise is the same for all, there is for 
each one a special different will according to God's 
purpose. And herein is the wisdom of the saints, to 
know this special will of God for each of us, accord- 
237 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

ing to the measure of grace given us, and so to ask in 
prayer just what God has prepared and made possi- 
ble for each. It is to communicate this wisdom that 
the Holy Ghost dwells in us. The personal applica- 
tion of the general promises of the word to our 
special personal needs— it is for this that the leadifig 
of the Holy Spirit is given us. 

It is this union of the teaching of the word and 
Spirit that many do not understand, and so there is a 
twofold difficulty in knowing what God's will may be. 
Some seek the will of God in an inner feeling or con- 
viction, and would have the Spirit lead them without 
the word. Others seek it in the word, without the 
living leading of the Holy Spirit, The two must be 
united : only in the word, only in the Spirit, but in 
these most surely, can we know the will of God, and 
learn to pray according to it. In the heart the word 
and Spirit must meet : it is only by indwelling that we 
can experience their teaching. The word must dwell, 
must abide in us : heart and life must day by day be 
under its influence. Not from without, but from 
within, comes the quickening of the word by the 
Spirit. It is only he who yields himself entirely in 
his whole life to the supremacy of the word and the 
will of God, who can expect in special cases to 
discern what that word and will permit him boldly to 
ask. And even as with the word, just so with the 
Spirit : if I would have the leading of the Spirit in 
prayer to assure me what God's will is, my whole life 
must be yielded to that leading ; so only can mind 
and heart become spiritual and capable of knowing 
238 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

God's holy will. It is he who, through word and 
Spirit, lives in the will oi God by doing it, who will 
know to pray according to that will in the confidence 
that He hears us. 

Would that Christians might see what incalculable 
harm they do themselves by the thought that because 
possibly their prayer is not according to God's will, 
they must be content without an answer. God's 
word tells us that the great reason of unanswered 
prayer is that we do not pray aright : " Ye ask and 
receive not, because ye ask amiss." In not granting 
an answer, the Father tells us that there is something 
wrong in our prayer. He wants to teach us to find it 
out and confess it, and so to educate us to true believ- 
ing and prevailing prayer. He can only attain His 
object when He brings us to see that we are to blame 
for the withholding of the answer ; our aim, or our 
faith, or our life is not what it should be. But this 
purpose of God is frustrated as long as we are content 
to say : It is perhaps because my prayer is not accord- 
ing to His will that He does not hear me. O let us 
no longer throw the blame of our unanswered 
prayers on the secret will of God, but on our own 
praying amiss. Let that word, " Ye receive not, be- 
cause ye ask amiss," be as the lantern of the Lord, 
searching heart and life to prove that we are indeed 
such as those to whom Christ gave His promises of 
certain answers. Let us believe that we caji know if 
our prayer be according to God's will. Let us yield 
our heart to have the word of the Father dwell richly 
there, to have Christ's word abiding in us. Let us 
239 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Hve day by day with the anointing which teacheth all 
things. Let us yield ourselves unreservedly to the 
Holy Spirit as He teaches us to abide in Christ, to 
dwell in the Father's presence, and we shall soon 
understand how the Father's love longs that the child 
should know His will, and should, in the confidence 
that that will includes all that His power and love 
have promised to do, know too that He hears the 
petitions which we ask of Him. " This is the bold- 
ness which we have, that if we ask anything according 
to His will, He heareth us." 

"Lord teach us to pray." 



Blessed Master ! with my whole heart I thank Thee 
for this blessed lesson, that the path to a life full 
of answers to prayer is through the will of God. 
Lord ! teach me to know this blessed will by living it, 
loving it, and always doing it. So shall I learn to 
offer prayers according to that will, and to find in 
their harmony with God's blessed will, my boldness 
in prayer and my confidence in accepting the answer. 

Father ! it is Thy ivill that Thy child should enjoy 
Thy presence and blessing. It is Thy will that 
everything in the life of Thy child should be in 
accordance with Thy will, and that the Holy Spirit 
should work this in Him. // is Thy will that Thy 
child should live in the daily experience of distinct 
answers to prayer, so as to enjoy living and direct 
fellowship with Thyself. It is Thy will that Thy 
240 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Name should be glorified in and through thy chil- 
dren, and that it will be in those who trust Thee. O 
my Father ! let this Thy will be my confidence in all 
I ask. 

Blessed Saviour ! teach me to believe in the glory 
of this will. That will is the eternal love, which with 
Divine power works out its purpose in each human 
will that yields itself to it. Lord ! teach me this. 
Thou canst make me see how every promise and 
every command of the word is indeed the will of 
God, and that its fulfilment is secured to me by God 
Himself. Let thus the will of God become to me 
the sure rock on which my prayer and my assurance 
of an answer ever rest. Amen. 



NOTE. 

There is often great confusion as to the will of God. 
People think that what God wills must inevitably 
take place. This is by no means the case. God wills 
a great deal of blessing to His people, which never 
comes to them. He wills it most earnestly, but they 
do not will it, and it cannot come to them. This is 
the great mystery of man's creation with a free will, 
and also of the renewal of His will in redemption, 
that God has made the execution of His will, in many 
things, dependent on the will of man. Of God's will 
revealed in His promises, so much will be fulfilled as 
i6 241 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

our faith accepts. Prayer is the power by which that 
comes to pass which otherwise would not take place. 
And faith, the power by which it is decided how 
much of God's will shall be done in us. When once 
God reveals to a soul what He is willing to do for it, 
the responsibility for the execution of that will rests 
with us. 

Some are afraid that this is putting too much power 
into the hands of man. But all power is put into the 
hands of man in Christ Jesus. The key of all prayer 
and all power is His, and when we learn to under- 
stand that He is just as much one with us as with the 
Father, and that we are also just as much one with 
Him as He with the Father, we shall see how natural 
and right and safe it is that to those who abide in Him 
as He in the Father, such power should be given. It is 
Christ the Son who has the right to ask what He 
will : it is through the abiding in Him and His abid- 
ing in us (in a Divine reality of which we have too 
little apprehension) that His Spirit breathes in us 
what He wants to ask and obtain through us. We 
pray in His Name ; the prayers are really ours and 
as really His. 

Others again fear that to believe that prayer has 
such power is limiting the liberty and the love of God. 
O if we only knew how we are limiting His liberty 
and His love by not allowing Him to act in the only 
way in which He chooses to act, now that He has 
taken us up into fellowship with Himself — through 
our prayers and our faith. A brother in the ministry 
once asked, as we were speaking on this subject, 
242 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

whether there was not a danger of our thinking that 
that our love to souls and our willingness to see them 
blessed were to move God's love and God's willing- 
ness to bless them. We were just passing some large 
water-pipes, by which water was being carried over 
hill and dale from a large mountain stream to a town 
at some distance. Just look at these pipes was the 
answer ; they did not make the water willing to flow 
downwards from the hills, nor did they give it its 
power of blessing and refreshment ; this is its very 
nature. All that they could do is to decide its direc- 
tion ; by it the inhabitants of the town said they want 
the blessing there. And just so, it is the very nature 
of God to love and to bless. Downward and ever 
downw^ard His love longs to come with its quicken- 
ing and refreshing streams. But He has left it to 
prayer to say where the blessing is to come. He has 
committed it to His believing people to bring the 
living water to the desert places : the will of God to 
bless is dependent upon the will of man to say where 
the blessing must descend. Such honor have His 
saints." " And this is the boldness which we have 
toward Him, that if we ask anything according to 
His will, He heareth us. And if we ktiow that He 
hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have 
the petitions which we have asked of Him." 
243 



THIRTIETH LESSON. 

*'An holy priesthood;*' or, The Ministry of 
Intercession. 

An holy priesthood, to offer tip spiritual sacrifices accept- 
able to God by Jesus Christ. — i Peter ii. 5. 

Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord. — IsAIAH 
Ixi. 6. 



• • T^HE Spirit of the Lord God is upon me ; be- 
1 cause the Lord hath anointed me." These 
are the words of Jesus in Isaiah. As the fruit of His 
work all redeemed ones are priests, fellow-partakers 
with Him of His anointing with the Spirit as High 
Priest. " Like the precious ointment upon the beard 
of Aaron, that went down to the skirts of his gar- 
ments." As every son of Aaron, so every member of 
Jesus' body has a right to the priesthood. But not 
every one exercises it ; many are still entirely igno- 
rant of it. And yet it is the highest privilege of a 
child of God, the mark of greatest nearness and like- 
ness to Him, "who ever liveth to pray." Do you 
doubt if this really be so ? Think of what constitutes 
priesthood. 

There is, first, the woi^k of the priesthood. This 
has two sides, one Godward, the other manward. 
244 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

" Every priest is ordained for men in things pertaining 
to God'' (Heb. v. i) ; or, as it is said by Moses 
(Deut. X. 8, see also xxi. 5, xxxiii. 10; Mai. ii. 6) : 
"The Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to stand 
before the Lord to minister unto Him, and to bless 
His Name:' On the one hand, the priest had the 
power to draw nigh to God, to dwell with Him in His 
house, and to present before Him the blood of the 
sacrifice or the burning incense. This work he did 
not do, however, on his own behalf, but for the sake 
of the people whose representative he was. This is 
the other side of his work. He received from the 
people their sacrifices, presented them before God, 
and then came out to bless in His Name, to give the 
assurance of His favor and to teach them His law. 

A priest is thus a man who does not at all live for 
himself. He lives with God ajid for God. His work 
is as God's servant to care for His house, His honor, 
and His worship, to make known to men His love 
and His will. He lives with men and for men (Heb. 
v. 2). His work is to find out their sin and need, 
and to bring it before God, to offer sacrifice and 
incense in their name, to obtain forgiveness and 
blessing for them, and then to come out and bless 
them in His Name. This is the high calling of every 
behever. '' Such honor have all His saints." They 
have been redeemed with the one purpose to be in 
the midst of the perishing millions around them God's 
priests, who in conformity to Jesus, the Great High 
Priest, are to be the ministers and stewards of the 
grace of God to all around them. 
245 



With Christ in tlie School of Prayer. 

And then there is the lualk of the priesthood, in har- 
mony with its work. As God is holy, so the priest 
was to be especially holy. This means not only 
separated from everything unclean, but holy unto 
God, being set apart and given up to God for His 
disposal. The separation from the world and setting 
apart unto God was indicated in many ways. 

It was seen in the clothing: the holy garments, 
made after God's own order, marked them as His 
(Ex. xxviii.). It was seen in the command as to 
their special purity and freedom from all contact from 
death and defilement (Lev. xxi. 22). Much that was 
allowed to an ordinary Israelite was forbidden to 
them. It was seen in the injunction that the priest 
must have no bodily defect or blemish ; bodily per- 
fection was to be the type of wholeness and holiness 
in God's service. And it was seen in the arrange- 
ment by which the priestly tribes w^ere to have no 
inheritance with the other tribes ; God was to be their 
inheritance. Their life was to be one of faith : set^ 
apart unto God, they were to live on Him as well as 
for Him. 

All this is the emblem of what the character of the 
New Testament priest is to be. Our priestly power 
with God depends on our personal life and walk. 
We must be of them of w^hose walk on earth Jesus 
says, "They have not defiled their garments." 

In the surrender of what may appear lawful to 

others in our separation from the world, we must 

prove that our consecration to be holy to the Lord is 

whole-hearted and entire. The bodily perfection of 

246 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the priest must have its counterpart in our too being 
" without spot or blemish; " " the man of God per- 
fect, throughly furnished unto all good works," 
" perfect and entire, wanting nothing" (Lev. xxi. 17- 
21 ; Eph. V. 27 ; 2 Tim. ii. 7 ; Jas. i. 4). And above 
all, we consent to give up all inheritance on earth ; to 
forsake all, and like Christ to have only God as our 
portion : to possess as not possessing, and hold all 
for God alone ; it is this marks the true priest, the 
man who only lives for God and his fellow-men. 

And now ^/le way to the priesthood. In Aaron God 
had chosen all his sons to be priests : each of them 
was a priest by birth. And yet he could not enter 
upon his work without a special act of ordinance — 
his consecration. Every child of God is priest in 
right of his birth, his blood relationship to the Great 
High Priest ; but this is not enough, he will exer- 
cise his power only as he accepts and realizes his 
consecration. 

With Aaron and his sons it took place thus (Ex. 
xxix.): After being washed and clothed, they were 
anointed with the holy oil. Sacrifices were then 
offered, and with the blood the right ear, the right 
hand, and the right foot were touched. And then 
they and their garments were once again sprinkled 
with the blood and the oil together. And so it is as 
the child of God enters more fully into what the 
Blood and the Spirit of which he already is par- 
taker, are to him, that the power of the Holy Priesthood 
will work in him. The blood will take away all sense 
of unworthiness ; the Spirit, all sense of unfitness. 
247 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Let us notice what there was new in the application 
of the blood to the priest. If ever he had as a penitent 
brought a sacrifice for his sin, seeking forgiveness 
the blood was sprinkled on the altar, but not on his 
person. But now, for priestly consecration, there was 
to be closer contact with the blood ; ear and hand 
and foot were by a special act brought under its 
power, and the whole being taken possession of and 
sanctified for God. And so, when the believer, who 
had been content to think chiefly of the blood 
sprinkled on the mercy-seat as what he needs for 
pardon, is led to seek full priestly access to God, he 
feels the need of a fuller and more abiding experience 
of the power of the blood, as really sprinkling and 
cleansing the heart from an evil conscience, so that 
he has "no more conscience of sin" (Heb. x. 2), as 
cleansing from all sin. And it is as he gets to enjoy 
this, that the consciousness is awakened of his won- 
derful right of most intimate access to God, and 
of the full assurance that his intercessions are ac- 
ceptable. 

And as the blood gives the right, the Spirit gives 
the power, and fits for believing intercession. He 
breathes into us the priestly spirit— burning love for 
God's honor and the saving of souls. He makes us 
so one with Jesus that prayer in His Name is a reality. 
He strengthens us to believing, importunate prayer. 
The more the Christian is truly filled with the Spirit 
of Christ, the more spontaneous will be his giving 
himself up to the life of priestly intercession. Be- 
loved fellow-Christians ! God needs, greatly needs, 
248 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

priests who can draw near to Him, who Hve in His 
presence, and by their intercession draw down the 
blessings of His grace on others. And the world 
needs, greatly needs, priests who will bear the 
burden of the perishing ones, and intercede on their 
behalf. 

Are you willing to offer yourself for this holy 
work ? You know the surrender it demands— nothing 
less than the Christ-like giving up of all, that the 
saving purposes of God's love may be accomplished 
among men. Oh, be no longer of those who are con- 
tent if they have salvation, and just do work enough 
to keep themselves warm and lively. O let nothing 
keep you back from giving yourselves to be wholly 
and only priests— nothing else, nothing less than the 
priests of the Most High God. The thought of un- 
worthiness, of unfitness, need not keep you back. In 
the Blood, the objective power of the perfect redemp- 
tion works in you : in the Spirit^ its full subjective 
personal experience as a divine life is secured. The 
Blood provides an infinite worthiness to make your 
prayers most acceptable : The Spirit provides a 
Divine fitness, teaching you to pray just according to 
the will of God. Every priest knew that when he 
presented a sacrifice according to the law of the 
sa?ictuary, it was accepted : under the covering of the 
Blood and Spirit you have the assurance that all 
the wonderful promises to prayer in the Name of 
Jesus will be fulfilled in you. Abiding in union with 
the Great High Priest, " you shall ask what you will, 
and it shall be done unto you." You will have power 
249 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

to pray the effectual prayer of the righteous man that 
availeth much. You will not only join in the general 
prayer of the Church for the world, but be able 
in your own sphere to take up your special work in 
prayer — as priests, to transact it with God, to receive 
and know the answer, and so to bless in His Name. 
Come, brother, come, and be a priest, ojily priest, all 
priest. Seek now to walk before the Lord in the full 
consciousness that you have been set apart for the 
holy Ministry of Intercession. This is the true 
blessedness of conformity to the image of God's Son. 

"Lord, teach us to pray." 



Thou my blessed High Priest, accept the conse- 
cration in which my soul now would respond to Thy 
message. 

1 believe in the Holy Priesthood of Thy 
Saints, and that I too am a priest, with power to 
appear before the Father, and in the prayer that 
avails much bring down blessing on the perishing 
around me. 

I believe in the Power of Thy Precious Blood 
to clease from all sin, to give me perfect confidence 
toward God, and bring me near in the full assurance 
of faith that my intercession will be heard. 

I believe in the Anointing of the Spirit, coming 

down daily from Thee, my Great High Priest, to 

sanctify me, to fill me with the consciousness of my 

priestly calling, and with love to souls, to teach me 

250 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

what is according to God's will, and how to pray the 
prayer of faith. 

I believe that, as Thou my Lord Jesus art Thyself 
in all things my life, so Thou, too, art the Surety 
FOR MY Prayer-life, and wilt Thyself draw me up 
into the fellowship of Thy wondrous work of inter- 
cession. 

In this faith I yield myself this day to my God, as 
one of His anointed priests, to stand before His face 
to intercede in behalf of sinners, and to come out and 
bless in His Name. 

Holy Lord Jesus ! accept and seal my consecration. 
Yea, Lord, do Thou lay Thy hands on me, and Thy- 
self consecrate me to this Thy holy work. And let 
me walk among men with the consciousness and the 
character of a priest of the Most High God. 

Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our 
sins IN His own blood, and hath made us kings 
and priests unto God and His Father ; to Him be 
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 
251 



THIRTY-FIRST LESSON. 
"Pray without ceasing;'* or, A Life of Prayer. 

Rejoice evermore. Pray luiihout ceasing. In everything 
give thanks. — j Thess. V. i6, 17, 18. 

OUR Lord spake the parable of the widow and 
the unjust judge to teach us that men ought to 
pray always and not feint. As the widow persevered 
in seeking one definite thing, the parable appears to 
have reference to persevering prayer for some one 
blessing, when God delays or appears to refuse. The 
words in the Epistles, which speak of continuing 
instant in prayer, continuing in prayer and watching 
in the same, of praying always in the Spirit, appear 
more to refer to the whole life being one of prayer. 
As the soul is filling with the longing for the mani- 
festation of God's glory to us and in us, through us 
and around us, and with the confidence that He hears 
the prayers of His children, the inmost life of the 
soul is continually rising upward in dependence and 
faith, in longing desire and trustful expectation. 

At the close of our meditations it will not be diffi- 
cult to say what is needed to live such a life of prayer. 
The first thing is undoubtedly the entire sacrifice of 
the life to God's kingdom and glory. He who seeks 
to pray without ceasing because he wants to be very 
252 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

pious and good, will never attain to it. It is the for- 
getting of self and yielding ourselves to live for God 
and His honor that enlarges the heart, that teaches 
us to regard everything in the light of God and His 
will, and that instinctively recognizes in everything 
around us the need of God's help and blessing, an 
opportunity for His being glorified. Because every- 
thing is weighed and tested by the one thing that fills 
the heart — the glory of God, and because the soul 
has learned that only what is of God can really be 
to Him and His glory, the whole life becomes a look- 
ing up, a crying from the inmost heart, for God to 
prove His power and love, and so show forth His 
glory. The believer awakes to the consciousness 
that he is one of the watchmen on Zion's walls, one 
of the Lord's remembrancers, whose call does really 
touch and move the King in heaven to do what 
would otherwise not be done. He understands how 
real Paul's exhortation was, ** praying always with all 
prayer and supplication in the Spirit for all the saints 
and forme," and "continue in prayer, withal praying 
also for us." To forget oneself, to live for God and 
His kingdom among men, is the way to learn to pray 
without ceasing. 

This life devoted to God must be accompanied by 
the deep confidence that our prayer is effectual. We 
have seen how our Blessed Lord insisted upon no- 
thing so much in His prayer-lessons as faith in the 
Father as a God who most certainly does what we 
ask. "Ask and ye shall receive;" count confi- 
dently on an answer, is with Him the beginning and 
253 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

the end of His teaching (compare Matt. vii. 8 and 
John xvi. 24). In proportion as this assurance mas- 
ters us, and it becomes a settled thing that our pray- 
ers do tell and that God does what we ask, we dare 
not neglect the use of this wonderful power : the 
soul turns wholly to God, and our life becomes 
prayer. We see that the Lord needs and takes time, 
because we and all around us are the creatures of 
time, under the law of growth ; but knowing that not 
one single prayer of faith can possibly be lost, that 
there is sometimes a needs-be for the storing up and 
accumulating of prayer, that persevering prayer is 
irresistible, prayer becomes the quiet, persistent liv- 
ing of our life of desire and faith in the presence of 
our God. O do not let us any longer by our reason- 
ings limit and enfeeble such free and sure promises 
of the living God, robbing them of their power, and 
ourselves of the wonderful confidence they are meant 
to inspire. Not in God, not in His secret will, not in 
the limitations of His promises, but in us, in our- 
selves is the hindrance ; we are not what we should 
be to obtain the promise. Let us open our whole 
heart to God's words of promise in all their simpli- 
city and truth ; they will search us and humble us ; 
they will lift us up and make us glad and strong. 
And to the faith that knows it gets what it asks, 
prayer is not a work or a burden, but a joy and 
a triumph ; it becomes a necessity and a second 
nature. 

This union of strong desire and firm confidence 
again is nothing but the life of the Holy Spirit within 
254 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

us. The Holy Spirit dwells in us, hides Himself in 
the depths of our being, and stirs the desire after the 
Unseen and the Divine, after God Himself. Now in 
groanings that cannot be uttered, then in clear and 
conscious assurance ; now in special distinct petitions 
for the deeper re\^elation of Christ to ourselves, then 
in pleadings for a soul, a work, the Church or the 
world, it is always and alone the Holy Spirit who 
draws out the heart to thirst for God, to long for His 
being made known and glorified. Where the child 
of God really lives and walks in the Spirit, where he 
is not content to remain carnal, but seeks to be spir- 
itual, in everything a fit organ for the Divine Spirit to 
reveal the life of Christ and Christ Himself, there the 
never-ceasing intercession-life of the Blessed Son 
cannot but reveal and repeat itself in our experience. 
Because it is the Spirit of Christ who prays in us, our 
prayer must be heard ; because it is we who pray in 
the Spirit, there is need of time, and patience, and 
continual renewing of the prayer until every obstacle 
be conquered, and the harmony between God's Spirit 
and ours is perfect. 

But the chief thing we need for such a life of un- 
ceasing prayer is, to know that Jesus teaches us to 
pray. We have begun to understand a little what 
His teaching is. Not the communication of new 
thoughts or views, not the discovery of failure or 
error, not the stirring up of desire and faith, of how- 
ever much importance all this be, but the taking us 
up into the fellowship of His own prayer-life before 
the Father— this it is by which Jesus really teaches. 
255 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

It was the sight of the praying Jesus that made the 
disciples long and ask to be taught to pray. It is the 
faith of the ever-praying Jesus, whose alone is the 
power to pray, that teaches us truly to pray. We 
know why : He who prays is our Head and our Life. 
All He has is ours and is given to'us when we give 
ourselves all to Him. By His blood He leads us into 
the immediate presence of God. The inner sanctuary 
is our home, we dwell there. And He that lives so 
near God, and knows that He has been brought near 
to bless those who are far, cannot but pray. Christ 
makes us partakers with Himself of His prayer- 
power and prayer-life. We understand then that our 
true aim must not be to work much, and have prayer 
enough to keep the work right, but to pray much 
and then to work enough for the power and blessing 
obtained in prayer to find its way through us to men. 
It is Christ who ever lives to pray, who saves and 
reigns. He communicates His prayer-life to us: He 
maintains it in us if we trust Him. He is surety for our 
praying without ceasing. Yes, Christ teaches to pray 
by showing how He does it, by doing it in us, by lead- 
ing us to do it in Him and like Him. Christ is all, the 
life and the strength too for a never ceasing prayer-life. 
It is the sight of this, the sight of the ever-praying 
Christ as our life, tliat enables us to pray without 
ceasing. Because His priesthood is the power of an 
endless life, that resurrection-life that never fades and 
never fails, and because His life is our life, praying 
without ceasing can become to us nothing less than 
the life joy of heaven. So the Apostle says: " Re- 
256 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

joice evermore : pray without ceasing : in everything 
give thanks." Borne up between the never-ceasing 
joy and the never-ceasing praise, never-ceasing prayer 
is the manifestation of the power of the eternal Hfe, 
where Jesus always prays. The union between the 
Vine and the branch is in very deed a prayer-union. 
The highest conformity to Christ, the most blessed par- 
ticipation in the glory of His heavenly life, is that we 
take part in His work of intercession : He and we live 
ever to pray. In the experience of our union with 
Him, praying without ceasing becomes a possibility, 
a reality, the holiest and most blessed part of our 
holy and blessed fellowship with God. We have our 
abode within the veil, in the presence of the Father. 
What the Father says, we do ; what the Son says, the 
Father does. Praying without ceasing is the earthly 
manifestation of heaven come down to us, the fore- 
taste of the life where they rest not day or night 
in the song of worship and adoration. 

" Lord, teach us to pray." 



O my Father, with my whole heart do I praise 
Thee for this wondrous life of never-ceasing prayer, 
never-ceasing fellowship, never-ceasing answers, and 
never-ceasing experience of my oneness with Him 
who ever lives to pray. O my God ! keep me ever so 
dwelling and walking in the presence of Thy glory, 
that prayer may be the spontaneous expression of my 
life with Thee. 

17 257 



With Christ in the School of Prayer. 

Blessed Saviour ! with my whole heart I praise 
Thee that Thou didst come from heaven to share 
with me in my needs and cries, that I might share 
with Thee in Thy all-prevailing intercession. And I 
thank Thee that Thou hast taken me into the school 
of prayer, to teach the blessedness and the power of 
a life that is all prayer. And most of all, that Thou 
hast taken me up into the fellowship of Thy life of in- 
tercession, that through me too Thy blessings may 
be dispensed to those around me. 

Holy Spirit ! with deep reverence I thank Thee for 
Thy work in me. It is through Thee I am lifted up 
into a share in the intercourse between the Son and 
the Father, and enter so into the fellowship of the life 
and love of the Holy Trinity. Spirit of God 1 perfect 
Thy work in me ; bring me into perfect union with 
Christ my Intercessor. Let Thine unceasing indwell- 
ing make my life one of unceasing intercession. And 
let so my life become one that is unceasingly to the 
glory of the Father and to the blessing of those 
around me. Amen. 

258 



NOTES. 



GEORGE MULLER, AND THE SECRET OF 
HIS POWER IN PRAYER. 

WH:EN God wishes anew to teach His Church a truth that 
is not being understood or practised, He mostly does so 
by raising some man to be iu word and deed a living 
witness to its blessedness. And so God has raised up in this 
nineteenth century, among others, George Muller to be His wit- 
ness that He is indeed the Hearer of prayer. I know of no way 
in which the principal truths of God's word in regard to prayer 
can be more effectually illustrated and established than a short 
review of his life and of what he tells of his prayer-experiences. 
He was born iu Prussia on the 25th of September, 1805, and is 
thus now eighty years of age. His early life, even after having 
entered the University of Halle, as a theological student, was 
wicked iu the extreme. lycd by a friend one evening, when 
just twenty years of age, to a prayer meeting, he was deeply 
impressed, and soon after brought to know the Saviour. Not 
long after he began reading missionary papers, and in course 
of time oSered himself to the IvOndon Society for promoting 
Christianity to the Jews. He was accepted as a student, but 
soon found that he could not in all things submit to the rules of 
the Society, as leaving too little liberty for the leading of the 
Holy Spirit. The connection was dissolved in 1830 by mutual 
consent, and he became the pastor of a small congregation at 
Teignmouth. In 1832, he was led to Bristol, and it was as pas- 
tor of Bethesda Chapel that he was led to the Orphan Home 
and other work, in connection with which God has so remark- 

259 



Notes. 

ably led him to trust His word and to experience how God ful- 
fills that word. 

A few extracts in regard to his spiritual life will prepare the 
way for what we specially wish to quote of his experiences in 
reference to prayer. 

" In connection with this I would mention, that the Lord very 
graciously gave me, from the very commencement of my divine 
life, a measure of simplicity and of childlike disposition in 
spiritual things, so that whilst I was exceedingly ignorant of 
the Scriptures, and was still from time to time overcome even 
by outward sins, yet I was enabled to carry most minute mat- 
ters to the Lord in prayer. And I have found ' godliness profit- 
able unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and 
of that which is to come ' Though very weak and ignorant, 
yet I had now, by the grace of God, some desire to benefit 
others, and he who so faithfully had once served Satan, sought 
now to win souls for Christ." 

It was at Teignmouth that he was led to know how to use 
God's word, and to trust the Holy Spirit as the Teacher given 
by God to make that word clear. He writes : — 

" God then began to show me that the word of God alone is 
our standard of judgment in spiritual things ; that it can be ex- 
plained only by the Holy Spirit ; and that in our day. as well as 
in former times, He is the Teacher of His people. The office of 
the Holy Spirit I had not experimentally understood before that 
time. 

" It was my beginning to understand this latter point in par- 
ticular, which had a great eflfect on me ; for the Lord enabled 
me to put it to the test of experience, by laying aside commen- 
taries, and almost every other book, and simply reading the 
word of God and studying it. 

" The result of this was, that the first evening that I shut my- 
self into my room, to give myself to prayer and meditation over 
the Scriptures, I learned more in a few hours than I had done 
during a period of several months previously. 

" But the particular difference was that I received real strength 
for my soul in so doing: I now began to try by the test of the Scrip- 
tures the things which I had learned and seen, and found that 
only those principles which stood the test were of real value." 
260 



Notes. 

Of obedience to the word of God, he write as follows, in con- 
nection with his being baptized : — 

"It had pleased God, in His abundant mercy, to bring my 
mind into such a state, that I was wilhng to carry out into my 
life whatever I should find in the Scriptures. I could say, ' I 
will do His will,' and it was on that account, I believe, that I 
saw which ' doctrine is of G<?^.'— And I would observe here, by 
the way, that the passage to which I have just alluded (John 
vii. 17) has been a most remarkable comment to me on many 
doctrines and precepts of our most holy faith. For instance : 
"Resist not evil ; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue 
thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak 
also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with 
him twain. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that 
would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. I^ove your enemies, 
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and 
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you ' 
(Matt. V. 39-44). 'Sell that ye have and give alms' (L,uke xii. 
33^. ' Owe no mau any thing, but to love one another ' (Rom. 
xiii. 8). It may be said, ' Surely these passages cannot be taken 
literally, for how then would the people of God be able to pass 
through the world?' The state of mind enjoined in John vii. 
17 will cause such objections to vanish. Whosoever is willing 
TO ACT OUT these commandments of the Lord literally, will, 
1 believe, be led with me to see that to take them literally is 
the will of God.— Those who do so take them will doubtless 
often be brought into difficulties, hard to the flesh to bear, but 
these will have a tendency to make them constantly feel that 
they are strangers and pilgrims here, that this world is not 
their home, and thus to throw them more upon God, who will 
assuredly help us through any difficulty into which we may be 
brought by seeking to act in obedience to His word." 

This implicit surrender to God's word led him to certain 
views and conduct in regard to money, which mightily influ- 
enced his future life. They had their root in the conviction that 
money was a Divine stewardship, and that all money had 
therefore to be received and dispensed in direct fellowship with 
God Himself. This led him to the adoption of the following 
261 



Notes. 

four great rules : i. Not to receive any fixed salary, both because 
iu the collecting of it there was ofteu much that was at variance 
with the freewill oflferiug with which God's service is to be 
maintained, and in the receiving of it a danger of placing more 
dependence on human sources of income than iu the living God 
Himself. 2. Never to ask any human being for help, however 
great the need might be, but to make his wants known to the 
God who has promised to care for His servants and to hear their 
prayer. 3. To take this command (Luke xii. 33) literally, ''Sell 
that thou hast and give alms, and never to save up money, but to 
spend all God entrusted to him on God's poor, on the work of 
His kingdom. 4. Also to take Rom. xiii. 8, "Owe no man any- 
thing," literally, and never to buy on credit, or be in debt for 
anjrthing, but to trust God to provide. 

This mode of living was not easy at first. But Muller testifies 
it was most blessed in bringing the soul to rest in God, and 
drawing it into closer union with Himself when inclined to 
backslide. " For it will not do, it is not possible , to live in sin, and 
at the same time, by co7nmu7iion with God, to draw dow,i frotn 
heaven everything one needs for the life that 7iow is." 

Not long after his settlement at Bristol, " The Scriptural 
Knowledgk Institution for Home and Abroad" was estab- 
lished for aiding in Day, Sunday-School, INIission and Bible 
work. Of this Institution the Orphan Home work, by which 
Mr. Muller is best known, became a branch. It was iu 1S34 that 
his heart was touched by the case of an orphan brought to 
Christ in one of the schools, but who had to go to a poorhouse 
where its spiritual wants would not be cared for. Meeting 
shortly after with a life of Franke, he writes (Nov. 20, 1835): 
*' To-day I have had it very much laid on my heart no longer 
merely to think about the establishment of an Orphan Home, 
but actually to set about it, and I have been very much in 
prayer respecting it, in order to ascertain the Lord's mind. 
May God make it plain." And again, Nov. 25 : "I have been 
again much in prayer yesterday and to-day about the Orphan 
Home, and am more and more convinced that it is of God. 
INIay He in mercy guide me. The three chief reasons are— i. 
That God may be glorified, should He be pleased to furnish me 
with the means, in its being seen that it is not a vain thing to 
262 



Notes. 

trust Him ; and that thus the faith of His children may be 
strengthened. 2. The spiritual welfare of fatherless and 
motherless children. 3. Their temporal welfare." 

After some months of prayer and waiting on God, a house 
was rented, with room for thirty children, and in course of 
time three more, containing in all 120 children. The work was 
carried on in this way for ten years, the supplies for the needs 
of the orphans being asked and received of God alone. It was 
often a time of sore need and much prayer, but a trial of faith 
more precious than of gold was found unto praise and honor 
and glory of God. The I,ord was preparing His servant for 
greater things. By His providence and His Holy Spirit, Mr. 
Muller was led to desire, and to wait upon God till he received 
from Him the sure promise of ^15,000 for a Home to contain 
300 children. This first Home was opened in 1849. In 1858, a 
second and third Home, for 950 more orphans, was opened, 
costing ^35,000. And in 1869 and 1870, a fourth and a fifth Home, 
for 850 more, at an expense of ^^50,000, making the total num- 
ber of the orphans 2,100. 

In addition to this work, God has given him almost as much 
as for the building of the Orphan Homes, and the maintenance 
of the orphans, for other work, the support of schools and mis- 
sions, Bible and tract circulation. In all he has received from 
God, to be spent in His work, during these fifty years, more 
than one million pounds sterling. How little he knew, let us 
carefully notice, that when he gave up his little salary of ^^30 a 
year in obedience to the leading of God's word and Holy Spirit, 
what God was preparing to give him as the reward of obedience 
and faith; and how wonderfully the word was to be fulfilled to 
him : " Thou hast been faithful over few things ; I will set thee 
over many things." 

And these things have happened for an ensample to us. God 
calls us to be followers of George Muller, even as he is of Christ. 
His God is our God; the same promises are for us; the same 
service of love and faith in which he labored is calling for us on 
every side. I,et us in connection with our lessons in the school 
of prayer study the way in which God gave George Muller such 
power as a man of prayer : we shall find in it the most remark- 
able illustration of some of the lessons which we have been 
263 



Notes. 

studying with the blessed Master in the word. "We shall 
specially have impressed upon us His first great lesson, that if 
we will come to Him in the way He has pointed out, with defi- 
nite petitions, made known to us by the Spirit, through the 
word as being according to the will of God, we may most confi- 
dently believe that whatsoever we ask it shall be done. 

Prayer and thk Word of God. 

"We have more than once seen that God's listening to our 
voice depends upon our listening to His voice. (See I^essons 22 
and 23.) We must not only have a special promise to plead, 
when we make a special request, but our whole life must be 
under the supremacy of the word : the word must be dwelling 
in us. The testimony of George MuUer on this point is most 
instructive. He tells us how the discovery of the true place of 
the word of God, and the teaching of the Spirit with it, was the 
commencement of a new era in his spiritual life. Of it he 
writes : — 

" Now the scriptural way of reasoning would have been : God 
Himself has condescended to become an author, and I am 
ignorant about that precious book which His Holy Spirit has 
caused to be written through the instrumentality of His ser- 
vants, and it contains that which I ought to know, and the 
knowledge of which will lead me to true happiness ; therefore 
I ought to read again and again this most precious book, this 
book of books, most earnestly, most prayerfully, and with much 
meditation ; and in this practice I ought to continue all the days 
of my life. For I was aware, though I read it but little, that I 
knew scarcely anything of it. But instead of acting thus, and 
being led by my ignorance of the word of God to study it more, my 
difficulty in understanding it, and the little enjoyment I had in 
it, made me careless of reading it (for much prayerful reading 
of the word gives not merely more knowledge, but increases 
the delight we have in reading it) ; and thus, like many be- 
lievers, I practically preferred, for the first four years of my 
divine life, the works of uninspired men to the oracles of the 
living God. The consequence was that I remained a babe, both 
in knowledge and grace. In knowledge, I say; for all true 
264 



Notes. 

knowledge must be derived, by the Spirit, from the word. And 
as I neglected the word, I was for nearly four years so ignorant, 
that I did not clearly know even the /undamental points of our 
holy faith. And this lack of knowledge most sadly kept me 
back from walking steadily in the ways of God. For when it 
pleased the Lord in August, 1829, to bring me really to the 
Scriptures, my life and walk became very different. And 
though ever since that I have very much fallen short of what I 
might and ought to be, yet by the grace of God I have been 
enabled to live m.uch nearer to Him than before. If any be- 
lievers read this who practically prefer other books to the Holy 
Scriptures, and who enjoy the writings of men much more than 
the word of God, may they be warned by my loss. I shall con- 
sider this book to have been the means of doing much good, 
should it please the I^ord, through its instrumentality, to lead 
some of His people no longer to neglect the Holy Scriptures, 
but to give them that preference which they have hitherto be- 
stowed on the writings of men. 

" Before I leave this subject, I would only add : If the reader 
understands very little of the word of God, he ought to read it 
very much ; for the Spirit explains the word by the word. And 
if he enjoys the reading of the word little, that is just the reason 
why he should read it much ; for the frequent reading of the 
Scriptures creates a delight in them, so that the more we read 
them, the more we desire to do so. 

"Above all, he should seek to have it settled in his own mind 
that God alone by His Spirit can teach him, and that therefore, 
as God will be inquired of for blessings, it becomes him to seek 
God's blessing previous to reading, and also whilst reading. 

"He should have it, moreover, settled in his mind that 
although the Holy Spirit is the best and sufficient Teacher, yet that 
this Teacher does not always teach immediately when we desire 
it, and that therefore we may have to entreat Him again and 
again for the explanation of certain passages ; but that He will 
surely teach us at last, if indeed we are seeking for light prayer- 
fully, patiently, and with a view to the glory of God." 1 

1 The extracts are from a work in four volumes, The Lord's 
Dealings with. George Muller. J. Nisbet & Co., I,ondon. 
265 



Notes. 

We find in his journal frequent mention made of his spending 
two and three hours in prayer over the word for the feeding of 
his spiritual life. As the fruit of this, when he had need of 
strength and encouragement in prayer, the individual promises 
were not to him so many arguments from a book to be used 
with God, but living words which he had heard the Father's 
living voice speak to him, and which he could now bring to the 
Father in living faith. 

Prayer and thk Wii,i, of God. 

One of the greatest difficulties with young believers is to 
know how they can find out whether what they desire is accord- 
ing to God's will. I count it one of the most precious lessons 
God wants to teach through the experience of George MuUer, 
that He is willing to make known, of things of which His word 
says nothing directly, that they are His will for us, and that we 
may ask them. The teaching of the Spirit, not without or 
against the word, but as something above and beyond it, in 
addition to it, without which we cannot see God's will, is the 
heritage of every believer. It is through the Word, and the 
WORD ALONE, that the Spirit teaches applying the general 
principles or promises to our special need. And it is the 
Spirit, and the Spirit alone, who can really make the word 
a light on our path, whether the path of duty in our daily walk, 
or the path of faith in our approach to God. Let us try and 
notice in what child-like simplicity and teachableness it was 
that the discovery of God's will was so surely and so clearly 
made known to His servant. 

With regard to the buildiug of the first Home and the assur- 
ance he had of its being God's will, he writes in May, 1850, just 
after it had been opened, speaking of the great difficulties there 
were, and how little likely it appeared to nature that they 
would be removed : " But while the prospect before me would 
have been overwhelming had I looked at it naturally, I was 
never even for once permitted to question how it would end. 
For as from the beginning T was sure it was the zvzll of God that 
I should go to the work of building for Him this large Orphan 
Home, so also from the beginning I was as certain that the 
266 



Notes. 

whole would be finished as if the Home had been already filled. 
The way in which he found out what was God's will, comes 
out with special clearness in his account of the building of the 
second Home ; and I ask the reader to study with care the les- 
son the narrative conveys : — 

" Dec. 5, 1850.— Under these circumstances I can only pray 
that the lyord in His tender mercy would not allow Satan to 
gain an advantage over me. By the grace of God my heart 
says : L,ord, if I could be sure that it is Thy will that I should go 
forward in this matter, I would do so cheerfully ; and, on the 
other hand, if I could be sure that these are vain, foolish, proud 
thoughts, that they are not from Thee, I would, by Thy grace, 
hate them, and entirely put them aside. 

"My hope is in God : He will help and teach me. Judging, 
however, from His former dealings with me, it would not be a 
strange thing to me, nor surprising, if He called me to labor yet 
still more largely in this way. 

" The thoughts about enlarging the Orphan work have not 
yet arisen on account of an abundance of money having lately 
come in ; for I have had of late to wait for about seven weeks 
upon God, whilst little, very little comparatively, came in, i. e., 
about four times as much was going out as came in ; and, had 
not the L,ord previously sent me large sums, we should have 
been distressed indeed. 

" Lord ! how can Thy servant know Thy will in this matter? 
Wilt Thou be pleased to teach him ? 

" Decejnber 11.— During the last six days, since writing the 
above, I have been, day after day, waiting upon God concern- 
ing this matter. It has generally been more or less all the day 
on my heart. When I have been awake at night, it has not 
been far from my thoughts. Yet all this without the least 
excitement. I am perfectly calm and quiet respecting it. My 
soul would be rejoiced to go forward in this service, could I be 
sure that the Lord would have me to do so ; for then, nothwith- 
stauding the numberless difi&culties, all would be well ; and His 
Naine would be magnified. 

" Oa the other hand, were I assured that the I^ord would 
have me to be satisfied with my present sphere of service, and 
that I should not pray about enlarging the work, by His grace 
267 



Notes. 

I could without an effort, cheerfully yield to it ; for He has 
brought me into such a state of heart, that I only desire to 
please Him iu this matter. Moreover, hitherto I have not 
spoken about this thing even to my beloved vi-ife, the sharer of 
my joys, sorrows and labors for more than twenty years ; nor is 
it likely that I shall do so for some time to come ; for I prefer 
quietly to wait on the I,ord, without conversing on this subject, 
in order that thus I may be kept the more easily, by His bless- 
ing, from being influenced by things from without. The bur- 
den of my prayer concerning this matter is, that the Lord 
would not allow me to make a mistake, and that He would 
teach me to do His will. 

" December 26.— Fifteen days have elapsed since I wrote the 
preceding paragraph. Kvery day since then I have continued 
to pray about this matter, and that with a goodly measure of 
earnestness, by the help of God. There has passed scarcely an 
hour during these days, in which, whilst awake, this matter 
has not been more or less before me. But all without even a 
shadow of excitement. I converse with no one about it. 
Hitherto have I not even done so with my dear wife. From 
this I refrain still, and deal with God alone about the matter, 
in order that no outward influence and no outward excitement 
may keep me from attaining unto a clear discovery of His will, 
I have the fullest and most peaceful assjirance that He will clearly 
show me His will. This evening I have had again an especial 
solemn season for prayer, to seek to know the will of God. 
But whilst I continue to entreat and beseech the I^ord, that He 
would not allow me to be deluded in this business, I may say I 
have scarcely any doubt remaining on my mind as to what will 
be the issue, even that I should go forward in this matter. As 
this, however, is one of the most momentous steps that I have 
ever taken, I judge that I cannot go about this matter with too 
much caution, prayerfulness, and deliberation. I am in no 
hurry about it. I could wait for years, by God's grace, were 
this His will, before even takiug one single step towards this 
thing, or even speaking to any one about it ; and, on the other 
hand, I would set to work to-morrow, were the Lord to bid me 
do so. This calmness of mind, this having no will of my own 
in the matter, this only wishing to please my Heavenly Father 
268 



Notes. 

In it, this only seeking His and not my honor in it ; this state of 
heart I say, is the fullest assurance to me that my heart is not 
under a fleshly excitement, and that if I am helped thus 
to go on, / shall know the will of God to the full But, while 
I write this, I cannot but add at the same time, that I do crave 
the honor and the glorious privilege to be more and more used 
by the I,ord. 

" I desire to be allowed to provide scriptural instruction for a 
thousand orphans, instead of doing so for 300. I desire to ex- 
pound the Holy Scriptures regularly to a thousand orphans, 
instead of doing so to 300. I desire that it may be yet more 
abundantly' manifest that God is still the Hearer and Answerer 
of prayer, and that He is the living God now as He ever was and 
ever will be, when He shall simplj', in answer to prayer, have 
condescended to provide me with a house for 700 orphans and 
with means to support them. This last consideration is the 
most important point in my mind. The Lord's honor is the 
principal point with me in this whole matter ; and just because 
this is the case, if He would be more glorified by not going for- 
ward in this business, I should by His grace be perfectly con- 
tent to give up all thoughts about another Orphan House. 
Surely in such a state of mind, obtained by the Holy Spirit, 
Thou, O my Heavenly Father, wilt not sttffer Thy child to be mis- 
taken, much less deluded. By the help of God I shall continue 
further day by day to wait upon Him in prayer, concerning this 
thing, till He shall bid me act. 

"■Jan. 2, 1851.— A week ago I wrote the preceding paragraph. 
During this week I have still been helped day by day, and more 
than once every day, to seek the guidance of the Lord about 
another Orphan House. The burden of my prayer has still 
beeu , that He in His great mercy would keep me from making 
a mistake. During the last week the book of Proverbs has come 
in the course of my Scripture reading, and my heart has been 
refreshed in reference to this subject by the following passages : 
* Trust in the Lord with all thine heart ; and lean not unto 
thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge Him, 
and He shall direct thy paths' (Prov. iii. 5, 6). By the grace of 
God I do acknowledge the Lord in all my ways, and in this 
thing in particular ; I have therefore the comfortable assurance 
269 



Notes. 

that He will direct my paths concerning this part of my service, 
as to whether I shall be occupied in it or not. Further : ' The 
integrity of the upright shall preserve them ' (Prov. xi. 3). By 
the grace of God I ain upright in this business. My honest pur- 
pose is to get glory to God. Therefore I expect to be guided 
aright. Further : ' Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy 
thoughts shall be established ' (Prov. xvi. 3). I do commit my 
works unto the Lord, and therefore expect that my thoughts 
will be established. My heart is more and more coming to a 
calm, quiet, and settled assurance, that the L,ord will condescend 
to use me still further in the orphan work. Here, Lord, is Thy 
servant." 

When later he decided to build two additional houses, Nos. 4 
and 5, he writes thus again : — 

"Twelve days have passed away since I wrote the last para- 
graph. I have still day by day been enabled to wait upon the 
Lord with reference to enlarging the Orphan work, and have 
been during the whole of this period also in perfect peace, which 
is the result of seeking in this thing only the Lord's honor and 
the temporal and spiritual benefit of my fellow-men. Without 
an effort could I by His grace put aside all thoughts about this 
whole affair, if only assured that it is the will of God that I 
should do so ; and, on the other hand, would at once go forward, 
if He would have it be so. I have still kept this matter entirely 
to myself Though it be now about seven weeks, since day by 
day, more or less, my mind has been exercised about it, and 
since I have been daily praying about it, yet not one human 
being knows of it. As yet I have not even mentioned it to my 
dear wife, in order that thus, by quietly waiting upon God, I 
might not be influenced by what might be said to me on the 
subject. This evening has been particularly set apart for prayer, 
beseeching the Lord once more not to allow me to be mistaken 
in this thing, and much less to be deluded by the devil. I have 
also sought to let all the reasons against building another 
Orphan House, and all the reasons /or doing so pass before my 
mind : and now for the clearness and definiteness, write them 
down. . . . 

" Much, however, as the nine previous reasons weigh with 
me, yet they would not decide me were there not one more. It 
270 



Notes. 

is this. After having for months pondered the matter, and 
having looked at it in all its bearings and with all its diiBculties, 
and then having been finally led, after much prayer, to decide 
on this enlargement, my mind is at peace. The child who has 
again and again besought His Heavenly Father not to allow 
him to be deluded, nor even to make a mistake, is at peace, 
perfectly at peace concerning this decision ; and has thus the 
assurance that the decision come to, after much prayer during 
weeks and months, is the leading of the Holy Spirit ; and 
therefore purposes to go forward, assuredly believing that he 
will not be confounded, for he trusts in God. Many and great 
maybe his difficulties ; thousands and ten thousands of prayers 
may have ascended to God, before the full answer may be ob- 
tained ; much exercise of faith and patience may be required ; 
but in the end it will again be seen, that His sei-vant, who trusts 
in Him, has not been confounded." 

Prayer and the Geory of God. 

We have sought more than once to enforce the truth, that 
while we ordinarily seek the reasons of our prayers not being 
heard in the thing we ask not being according to the will of 
God, Scripture warns us to find the cause in ourselves, in our 
not being in the right state or not asking in the right spirit. 
The thing may be in full accordance with His will, but the ask- 
ing, the spirit of the supplicant, not ; then we are not heard. 
As the great root of all sin is self and self-seeking, so there is 
nothing that even in our more spiritual desires so effectually 
hinders God in answering as this : we pray for our own pleasure 
or glory. Prayer to have power and prevail must ask for the 
glory of God ; and he can only do this as he is living for God's 
glory. 

In George Muller we have one of the most remarkable in- 
stances on record of God's Holy Spirit leading a man deliber- 
ately and systematically, at the outset of a course of prayer, to 
make the glorifjdng of God his first and only object. Let us 
ponder well what he says, and learn the lesson God would 
teach us through him : — 

" I had constantly cases brought before me, which proved that 
271 



Notes. 

one of the especial things which the children of God needed in 
our day, was to have their faith strengtlie7ied> 

" I longed, therefore, to have something to point my brethren 
to, as a visible proof that our God and Father is the same faith- 
ful God as ever He was ; as willing as ever to prove Himself to 
be the living God in our day as formerly, to all -who put their 
trust in Him. 

" My spirit longed to be instrumental in strengthening their 
faith, by giving them not only instances from the word of God, 
of His willingness and ability to help all who rely upon Him, 
but to shoiv them by proofs that He is the same in our day. I 
knew that the word of God ought to be enough, and it was by 
grace enough for me ; but still I considered I ought to lend a 
helping hand to my brethren. 

"I therefore judged myself bound to be the servant of the 
Church of Christ, in the particular point in which I had ob- 
tained mercy; namely, in being able to take God at His word 
and rely upon it. The first object of the work was, and is still : 
that God might be magvified by the fact that the orphans under 
my care are provided with all they need, only by prayer and 
faith^ without any one being asked ; thereby it may be seen that 

God is FAITHFUL STILL, AND HEARS PRAYER STILL. 

" I have again these last days prayed much about the Orphan 
House, and have frequently examined my heart ; that if it were 
at all my desire to establish it for the sake of gratifying myself, 
I might find it out. For as I desire only the Lord's glory I shall 
be glad to be instructed by the instrumentality of my brother, 
if the matter be not of Him. 

" When I began the Orphan work in 1835, my chief object was 
the glory of God, by giving a practical demonstration as to 
what could be accomplished simply through the instrumentality 
of prayer and faith, in order thus to benefit the Church at large, 
and to lead a careless world to see the reality of the things of 
God, by showing them in this work, that the living God is still, 
as 4,000 years ago, the living God. This my aim has been 
abundantly honored. Multitudes of sinners have been thus 
converted, multitudes of the children of God in all parts of the 
world have been benefited by this work, even as I had antici- 
pated. But the larger the work has grown, the greater has 
272 



Notes. 

been' the blessing, bestowed in the very way in which I looked 
for blessing : for the attention of hundreds of thousands has 
been drawn to the work ; and many tens of thousands have 
come to see it. All this leads me to desire further and further 
to labor on in this way, in order to bring yet greater glory to the 
Name of the L,ord That He 7nay be looked at ^ magnified, admired, 
trusted in, relied on at all times, is my aim in this service ; and 
so particularly in this intended enlargement. That it may be 
seen how much one poor man, simply by trusting in God, can 
bring about by prayer ; and that thus other children of God 
may be led to carry on the work of God in dependence upon 
Him ; and that children of God may be led increasingly to trust 
in Him in their individual positions and circumstances, there- 
fore I am led to this further enlargement." 

Prayer and Trust in God. 

There are other points on which I would be glad to point out 
what is to be found in Mr. MuUer's narrative, but one more must 
suffice. It is the lesson of firm and unwavering trust in God's 
promise as the secret of persevering prayer. If once we have, 
in submission to the teaching of the Spirit in the word, taken 
hold of God's promise, and believed that the Father has heard 
us, we must not allow ourselves by any delay or unfavorable 
appearances to be shaken in our faith. 

" The full answer to my daily prayers was far from being 
realized ; yet there was abundant encouragement granted by 
the I,ord, to continue in prayer. But suppose, even, that far less 
had come in than was received, still, after having come to the 
conclusion, upon scriptural grounds, after much prayer and 
self-examination, I ought to have gone on without wavering, in 
the exercise of faith and patience concerning this object ; and 
thus all the children of God, when once satisfied that anything 
which they bring before God in prayer, is according to His will, 
ought to continue in believing, expecting, persevering prayer 
until the blessing is granted. Thus am I myself now waiting 
upon God for certain blessings, for which I have daily besought 
Him for ten years and six months without one day's intermis- 
sion. Still the full answer is not yet given concerning the con- 
i8 273 



Notes. 

version of certain individuals, though in the meantime I have re- 
ceived many thousands of answers to prayer. I have also 
prayed daily v^ithout intermission for the conversion of other 
individuals about ten years, for others six or seven years, for 
others from three or tw^o years ; and still the answer is not yet 
granted concerning those persons, while in the meantime many 
thousands of my prayers have been answered, and also souls 
converted, for whom I have been praying. I lay particular 
stress on this for the benefit of those who may suppose that I 
need only to ask of God, and receive at once ; or that I might 
pray concerning anything, and the answer would surely come. 
One can only expect to obtain answers to prayers which are ac- 
cording to the mind of God ; and even then patience and faith 
may be exercised for many years, even as mine are exercised, 
in the matter to which I have referred ; and yet am I daily con- 
tinuing in prayer, and expecting the answer, and so surely ex- 
pecting the answer, that I have often thanked God that He will 
surely give it, though now for nineteen years faith and patience 
have thus been exercised. Be encouraged, dear Christians, with 
fresh earnestness to give yourselves to prayer, if you can only 
be sure that you ask things which are for the glory of God. 

" But the most remarkable point is this, that ^6, 6s. bd. from 
Scotland supplied me, as far as can be known now, with all the 
means necessary for fitting up and promoting the new Orphan 
Houses. Six years and eight months I have been day by day, 
and generally several times daily, asking the Lord to give me 
the needed means for this enlargement of the Orphan work, 
which, according to calculations made in the spring of 1861, 
appeared to be about fifty thousand pounds, but which at a later 
period was found to be about fifty-eight thousand pounds : the 
total of this amount I had now received. I praise and magnify 
the IvOrd for putting this enlargement of the work into my 
heart, and for giving me courage and faith for it ; and above all, 
for sustaining my faith day by day without wavering. When 
the last portion of the money was received, I was no more 
assured concerning the whole, than I was at the time I had not 
received one single donation towards this large sum. I was at 
the beginning, after once having ascertained His mind, through 
most patient and heart-searching waiting upon God, as fully 
274 



Notes. 

lassured that He would bring it about, as if the two houses, with 
their hundreds of orphans occupying them, had been already 
before me. I make a few remarks here for the sake of young 
believers in connection with this subject : i. Be slow to take 
new steps in the Lord's service, or in your business, or in your 
families : weigh everything well ; weigh all in the light of the 
Holy Scriptures and in the fear of God. 2. Seek to have no 
will of your own, in order to ascertain the mind of God, regard- 
ing any steps you propose taking, so that you can honestly say 
you are willing to do the will of God, if He will only please to 
instruct ycu. 3. But when you have found out what the will ot 
God is, seek for His help, and seek it earnestly, perseveringly, 
patiently, believingly, expectantly ; and you will surely in His 
own time and way obtain it. 

" To suppose that we have difficulty about money only would 
be a mistake : there occur hundreds of other wants and of other 
difficulties. It is a rare thing that a day occurs without some 
difficulty or some want ; but often there are many difficulties 
and many wants to be met and overcome the same day. All 
these are met by prayer and faith, our universal remedy ; and 
we have never been confounded. Patient, persevering, believ- 
ing prayer, offered up to God, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, 
has always, sooner or later, brought the blessing. I do not 
despair, by God's grace, of obtaining any blessing, provided I 
can be sure it would be for any real good, and for the glory of 
God." 

275 



•^»« ^SbKB° CB OB..HTMBN. 



This book is " 



nder 



taken «ro«* 



, circumstances 
the BuUding 




